[Amit Varma]: Where are you from? If someone asks me that question, I don't have an easy answer. I can
[Amit Varma]: tell you where I was born and where I grew up and where I worked and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: But I am shaped less by geography than I would have been a century or two ago. The biggest
[Amit Varma]: influences in my early years were the books I read and the films I saw, most of which
[Amit Varma]: came from the West. English is my first language. And once the internet came into my life, it
[Amit Varma]: became my window to the world. And that world became my hometown. I read Alice Munro and
[Amit Varma]: Yoko Ogawa. I listened to Van Morrison and Joni Mitchell. I'd rather watch paint dry
[Amit Varma]: in a Tarkovsky film than bullets fly in a Shahrukh Khan film. I also love Indian authors
[Amit Varma]: and music and films, of course, so I'm not quite a deracinated product of the remote
[Amit Varma]: West. Some days I have pizza, some days I have biryani and my weighing scale doesn't
[Amit Varma]: like it. But while much of my surroundings in Mumbai are a comfort zone for me, out of
[Amit Varma]: pure habit, I do wish sometimes that my roots were deeper. I like the idea of being a global
[Amit Varma]: citizen, but this globe is an abstract thing, unlike the earth beneath my feet, which is
[Amit Varma]: unseen to me as I walk all over it. If one is to be cosmopolitan, one should be, in a
[Amit Varma]: memorable phrase used by my guest today, a rooted cosmopolitan.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Amit Varma]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the seen and the unseen. My guest today is Sugata Srinivasaraju. And while he's
[Amit Varma]: been a writer and a journalist, those terms seem inadequate to describe him. A better
[Amit Varma]: term perhaps would be a man of letters, or even better, a man of culture. Born to a literary
[Amit Varma]: family, Sugata wanted to be a writer from a young age, hung out with legends of Kannada
[Amit Varma]: literature, found equal fluency in Kannada and English, and by engaging with the world
[Amit Varma]: of ideas, he made himself into what Ram Guha once called a dying breed, the bilingual intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: Sugata's latest book is Furrows in a Field, a biography of H.D. Devya Gowda that is as
[Amit Varma]: much the portrait of a man as of Karnataka politics itself. I went to Bangalore in February
[Amit Varma]: intending to chat with Sugata about this book. I read it carefully. I took copious notes.
[Amit Varma]: They were passages I almost knew by heart. And then, Sugata and I spoke for over five
[Amit Varma]: hours and we didn't spend even one minute of that talking about the book. His life itself
[Amit Varma]: was so fascinating, especially when it came to describing the milieu where he grew up,
[Amit Varma]: a world of letters and ideas where every neighbourhood in Bangalore seemed to be home to a different
[Amit Varma]: school of literature. I learnt about the rich world of Kannada literature, a vast ocean
[Amit Varma]: of art that our Anglophone elites miss while staring into a tumbler of water. I learnt
[Amit Varma]: about his journey through Indian journalism, a field in which high ideals and petty corruption
[Amit Varma]: are always jostling each other. We discussed how our culture and politics are changing,
[Amit Varma]: the narrow visions of both nationalism and our many sub-nationalisms. I was struck most
[Amit Varma]: of all by a phrase he used to describe himself, rootedly cosmopolitan. I know few people to
[Amit Varma]: whom that lovely phrase can be attached. I'm not one of them. Sugata Srinivasaraju is a
[Amit Varma]: rooted cosmopolitan. I love this conversation and I'm sure you will as well. But before
[Amit Varma]: we begin, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: On the 20th of July, 2007, a lady named Mrs. Gaware returned to her home in Dombivali to
[Amit Varma]: find that her daughter Snehal, who had been relaxing in her room, was missing. Snehal's
[Amit Varma]: slippers, her spectacles, her braces, without which she never left home, were still there.
[Amit Varma]: There was a hunt for the girl, a police complaint was filed and worry gave way to panic. The
[Amit Varma]: next day, Mrs. Gaware entered Snehal's room and noticed that a water jar that was normally
[Amit Varma]: in the storage under the bed was now outside. So she opened up the storage and found her
[Amit Varma]: dead daughter inside, her hands tied behind her back, a towel around her mouth. This happened
[Amit Varma]: just a few kilometres from where I live. But I hadn't heard of this till I came across
[Amit Varma]: the Desi Crime Podcast, the sponsors of this episode. The Desi Crime Podcast is hosted
[Amit Varma]: by Aishwarya Singh and Aryan Misra, and they talk about crimes from India, Pakistan, Nepal,
[Amit Varma]: any place you'd call desi. In it, they talk about crimes like the bed-box murder, Snehal
[Amit Varma]: Gaware's case. We learn about Hercules, a vigilante in Bangladesh who punished rapists
[Amit Varma]: by killing them. Who was Hercules? Why did Hercules act where the law had failed? Great
[Amit Varma]: stories can raise fascinating questions that keep us up at night. And the Desi Crime Podcast
[Amit Varma]: has plenty of those. You can find it on Apple, Spotify, Amazon Music, or wherever you listen
[Amit Varma]: to your podcasts. So check out the Desi Crime Podcast and remember, there's a killer on
[Amit Varma]: the loose in your neighbourhood.
[Amit Varma]: So
[Amit Varma]: much better and she took me through you know many decades of it and then someone on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: commented that you really must talk to Swagata Srinivasa Raju about Karnataka politics at
[Amit Varma]: which point my ears perked up but then I thought that I have to have some baseline knowledge
[Amit Varma]: of a subject to begin with to be able to talk to someone about it and I am completely clueless
[Amit Varma]: about Karnataka politics was then and to a lesser extent now because of your wonderful
[Amit Varma]: book but you know that's kind of the extent of it but I've been following your work since
[Amit Varma]: and the book gave me an opportunity to invite you on the show so delighted to have you so
[Amit Varma]: you know let's let's kind of you've got such a rich and varied career and there are many
[Amit Varma]: aspects of that I'd like to touch on before we get to your book but first tell me a little
[Amit Varma]: bit about you know where were you born where did you grow up what were those years like
[Guest]: thank you Amit I was raised in Bangalore I mean I was born in Bangalore brought up in
[Guest]: Bangalore and my ancestors in a sense been at least two or three generations were all
[Guest]: in Bangalore so I never sort of got a chance to sort of go to the rural hinterland or be
[Guest]: part of a rural you know setting whatever so I was always an urban boy but then Bangalore
[Guest]: of what what it is today is not the Bangalore of the 70s when I was born so I still always
[Guest]: had this feeling that I was a provincial boy and it was a provincial town or it was a small
[Guest]: town and so this and it was a very pastoral kind of city because if you you know went
[Guest]: into the smaller bylanes of Bangalore you would still see people having cows milking
[Guest]: their cows in the morning and it was very laid-back kind of a city there was no the
[Guest]: city was not you know I mean set to the space that it is set to today that is after 2000
[Guest]: you saw a sudden shift and many of us don't recognize the Bangalore that we grew up in
[Guest]: and I think this is the constant complaint of everybody who sort of has grown up in cities
[Guest]: you know and has seen say 20 30 years or 40 years go by because everything is dramatically
[Guest]: changed drastically changed and that is my experience too about Bangalore so I was basically
[Guest]: born and brought up in Bangalore my mother's side came from a place called Tumkur which
[Guest]: is right outside Bangalore which is now connected by a six-lane highway and you can reach there
[Guest]: in an hour and it's almost an extension of Bangalore now and my father's side came from
[Guest]: a much closer place in rural Bangalore district I don't know if you're familiar with a big
[Guest]: banyan tree you know you see it on all the record books and because it's a real big banyan
[Guest]: tree and we were my father's you know forefathers were Patels of that village and that is supposed
[Guest]: to have come to us as some kind of a Jagir from the Mysore Maharaja my mother's side
[Guest]: came I think they migrated after the fall of the Vijayanagara Empire from that area
[Guest]: Balari area so they they trace their ancestry back to Anegundi kingdom so but these are
[Guest]: things that I've not fact-checked and these are things that I've heard and you know I
[Guest]: mean there is in other cultures there is this genealogical thing maps written and all that
[Guest]: but here you know some of the property papers mention this but then you know I've never
[Guest]: I mean I should say as a journalist and as a writer that I don't think I've fact-checked
[Guest]: any of this this is what you've heard and I'm just sharing that with you so so this
[Guest]: is basically my background and my father was a professor of Kannada language and literature
[Guest]: and he taught at the Christ College which has now become Christ University was one of
[Guest]: the founding faculty members of that institution and he was a huge and major influence on me
[Guest]: he was he went to the St. Joseph's College in Bangalore his father I mean who had come
[Guest]: to Bangalore from Ramohalli which is that big banyan tree thing was a police officer
[Guest]: you know he was in the first batch of CBI officers those days and so they were educated
[Guest]: he was the first generation he was educated that was the first generation that got educated
[Guest]: in the family that was my grandfather and my father was you know I mean relatively better
[Guest]: off because of his father's education and he went to the St. Joseph's College to study
[Guest]: science so he did his BSc and then got into a job in a mining company again in Karnataka
[Guest]: but then I think in the 70s there was this resurgence of Kannada you know activism and
[Guest]: pride and the burst of literary activity and all that I think he was drawn into that and
[Guest]: he shifted from sciences and mining and all that into literature so he came back to the
[Guest]: Central College in Bangalore to do his MA in Kannada literature under Stalwarts so G.P.
[Guest]: Rajaratnam who is one of the big names in Kannada literature was his teacher and he
[Guest]: sort of almost called himself a disciple of this man and it is very important to mention
[Guest]: G.P. Rajaratnam because G.P. Rajaratnam did a lot of good for Kannada not in just terms
[Guest]: of you know a creative literature but also he brought Buddhist literature into Kannada
[Guest]: Jaina literature into Kannada he himself sort of became a kind of Buddhist and wore white
[Guest]: you know all times and this man put this seed into my father's head that it is not just
[Guest]: enough to write literature but you also have to create a literary atmosphere and a culture
[Guest]: so wherein younger people sort of you know come in and thrive and do good things so culture
[Guest]: it's about nurturing that environment was an idea that came from G.P. Rajaratnam to
[Guest]: my father and G.P. Rajaratnam got it from another stalwart or a contemporary of his
[Guest]: called A. R. Krishna Shastri so they used to run this Karnataka Sangha in Central College
[Guest]: and they actually nurtured really great writers like P. Lankesh was I'm just giving you one
[Guest]: instance Nisar Ahmed who passed away recently was another very big name so they that was
[Guest]: a kind of you know cradle for young writers and they they sort of picked their writing
[Guest]: looked at it you know edited it and put it into an anthology published it and sort of
[Guest]: made them feel that they were writers and then nurtured a kind of environment in Kannada
[Guest]: which was a selfless thankless kind of a thing because these writers themselves were not
[Guest]: very rich you know they were themselves first-generation literates perhaps and they were just doing
[Guest]: this out of their own you know I mean volition and you know I mean certain kind of commitment
[Guest]: and you know a different kind of philosophy totally so my father was in that tradition
[Guest]: so my father thought that because he had received so much from this tradition he also has to
[Guest]: continue that and besides being a poet and a playwright in Kannada he also started a
[Guest]: small publishing house in Christ College which was a Christian institution as the name goes
[Guest]: but run by I mean monks who came from Kerala you know it was a kind of congregation which
[Guest]: was which was that you know because that distinction has to be made because there are monks also
[Guest]: from Mangalore you know in the St. Joseph's College is run by mostly fathers who come
[Guest]: from Mangalore so this was a Malayalam Malayali kind of environment a Christ College and so
[Guest]: he starts the Kannada Sangha there and has the first book that he brings out is an anthology
[Guest]: of poems on Christ in Kannada and that becomes a controversy because you know I mean I forget
[Guest]: exactly why it became a controversy but he handles that controversy and what he did was
[Guest]: that he kept a small you know portion of his salary aside to bring out these publications
[Guest]: so my mother used to always tell us that your father is sort of you know I mean is more
[Guest]: worried about what book to bring out next rather than you know worry about your education
[Guest]: you know and she was teasingly you know I mean she was a willing collaborator in his
[Guest]: enterprise but then but this was the kind of so he sort of did that so today in Kannada
[Guest]: a lot of big writers including H.S. Shivaprakash or K.V. Narayan or a lot of people were products
[Guest]: of his sort of you know I mean a nurturing you know enterprise literally and a lot of
[Guest]: I also met my wife through one of his you know he brought on an anthology and my wife
[Guest]: had published a poem so she used to come to see him my later wife you know so that's how
[Guest]: I sort of met her so I keep telling my you know I mean friends and family that my father's
[Guest]: literature you know I mean indulgence and all that did not after all go waste because
[Guest]: you know I mean I sort of found a life partner and it has done well and it has sort of given
[Guest]: us so much of goodwill and there are so many writers you know today I am I mean I may have
[Guest]: worked in publications in Karnataka I mean nationally internationally and all of that
[Guest]: but in Karnataka I'm always known as my father's son so I mean that's another thing which I
[Guest]: always I mean sometimes it swell with pride that it is that way but sometimes I feel it
[Guest]: or what more should I do to sort of be recognized as you know I mean on my own no terms so that
[Guest]: is essentially the kind of environment that I grew up in and my father was a was not a
[Guest]: person again this thing has to be told in the environment that we are in today that
[Guest]: he was not a chauvinist he was not a no one did not think of literature and Kannada and
[Guest]: Karnataka in a in very narrow terms so he was he was rootedly cosmopolitan as a phrase
[Guest]: that I later came to use in my first book so he's rootedly cosmopolitan the sense his
[Guest]: assignments to be summer assignments to me Amit was asking me to translate say he used
[Guest]: to leave the house in the morning so he would say by the time I come back this is a short
[Guest]: poem or a short story and you should have translated it by evening so he put me on this
[Guest]: bilingual swing you know right very very early so I mean my I think I started translating
[Guest]: when I was a three-year in my third class or fourth class and so there used to he used
[Guest]: to subscribe to a lot of magazines you know including Encounter used to come home Quest
[Guest]: used to come only later did I realize that Quest was a CIA operation right then London
[Guest]: Calling the BBC magazine used to come home then we used to get Soviet literature which
[Guest]: is again you know I mean from the Soviet Union those days used to subsidize all this then
[Guest]: Chinese literature used to come home you know printed on lovely glossy paper with lovely
[Guest]: paintings and so this was there and then we also sort of he used to you know he had this
[Guest]: habit of taking a loan from say the State Bank of Mysore or Canara Bank to buy encyclopedias
[Guest]: or volumes which we could not just buy it one stroke and I mean it was very expensive
[Guest]: so so my so the encyclopedia that I have at home you know the American ones or the he
[Guest]: gifted me a six set tell me why series and that was expensive those days and I don't
[Guest]: think a teacher's salary could afford that kind of indulgence so otherwise you know there
[Guest]: was always premium Mr. Shanbhag and they were great friends and he paid his bills only once
[Guest]: a month at the end of the month so you know and that was the kind of and houses fully
[Guest]: stacked with books and so he introduced us to not just Kannada literature trying to tell
[Guest]: us that you should read your K.S. Narsimha Swami or your K.V. Puttappa or P.T. Narsimhachar
[Guest]: or say Lankesh, Lankesh was a huge huge influence on me later after he started his tabloid I
[Guest]: mean I mean I would call it a compact newspaper I wouldn't call it a tabloid it became a tabloid
[Guest]: later for various reasons but then so so so he would ask me to read you know look at Russian
[Guest]: literature especially and European literature you know I don't think I would have ever read
[Guest]: Stendhal or Balzac or Victor Hugo you know Baudelaire all of these people were being just you know
[Guest]: they were names and then they became reality in my imagination and in my whatever so so
[Guest]: he sort of pushed me to look at them and he just did not ask me to read them then he just
[Guest]: gave me passages to translate so they so they became part of me in a very different way
[Guest]: it is not not just about reading them and you know I mean making them part of you but
[Guest]: also of your consciousness but also sort of making them a part of you in a entirely different
[Guest]: way where those phrases and those so you had to actually dabble in two languages wondering
[Guest]: what this is I mean I was just thrown a challenge once you know I mean there is a lovely poem
[Guest]: of K.S. Narsimha Swami so I used to tell my father why are you asking me to translate
[Guest]: only into Kannada I'll try and translate into English so why why is it why is it that I
[Guest]: should not attempt the other way around so he said yeah you're you're welcome try and
[Guest]: do it so I just picked a poem of K.S. Narsimha Swami to translate and in which there is a
[Guest]: very idiomatic expression which says which is she's this fellow is newly married he's
[Guest]: come to his father-in-law's house and realizes the wife is actually not she's having periods
[Guest]: and they can't sort of you know I mean there is this whole cultural thing about not being
[Guest]: together when you're having your period so so he comes there and then this line is there
[Guest]: it is very subtly communicated in the poem so now how do you bring it into English was
[Guest]: the challenge to a boy who's still in his early teens who does not understand the idea
[Guest]: and then so so my father's friend who was also a great literary critic in Kannada he
[Guest]: came in the evening and then he said okay so apparently you're trying to translate Narsimha
[Guest]: Swami let me have a look at it and then he said how how will you go how will you translate
[Guest]: this line so then I said you know I I just said she's not inside or something like that
[Guest]: you know Padumalu Olagilla Paduma is not inside is the literal translation of it so then he
[Guest]: he just had a good laugh and then I don't think you know they tried to explain it to
[Guest]: me but I realized it much later that you know I mean this is culturally that that's when
[Guest]: I realized that there's so much culture idiomatic which you cannot translate there's so much
[Guest]: that this culture sort of holds together which another language finds it extremely difficult
[Guest]: to capture or the registers of another language or idioms or expressions or phraseology of
[Guest]: the other language cannot capture so then that gave me an idea that this is unique this
[Guest]: world is unique and there is another world there so I am trying to be an ambassador between
[Guest]: these two worlds so I always sort of had this idea that I was an ambassador between two
[Guest]: worlds or and and I wish that it became more than two worlds and therefore I went and learned
[Guest]: a bit of French because Lankesh translated Baudelaire into Kannada called and it was
[Guest]: called Papa the Hoogalu so when I read it I was so thrilled you know I mean so I said
[Guest]: okay I should go and read these poems and they're original so I went to learn French
[Guest]: at the Allianz Francais but then you know I mean the French that you learn there was
[Guest]: so inadequate you just you know got a bit of an idea of what it was what the language
[Guest]: is all about like but then I never got to read it and the original but then at least
[Guest]: there was that kind of trigger you know I mean to go and seek it out and the original
[Guest]: but when I even as I sort of recount all this Amit and I you made me sort of look look back
[Guest]: on all these and talk about this which I don't think I would have ever sort of pulled out
[Guest]: but I was a student of science I was not a student of literature you know I mean when
[Guest]: I joined when I finished my 10th class and that's another story as to why I said I mean
[Guest]: I wanted to be a cricketer like every other Bangalorean I wanted to be a cricketer so
[Guest]: I went to the St. Joseph's Indian High School which was started in I think 1904 as an alternative
[Guest]: to the European St. Joseph's European High School which is a which is where the elites
[Guest]: went and this was for the common people so I went to the St. Joseph's Indian High School
[Guest]: and there there was a great sporting culture so I wanted to play cricket too so I then
[Guest]: we had Salus Nazareth who played Ranji Trophy for Mysore as one of our coaches and then
[Guest]: I thought I should get into the school team and I wasn't I wanted to play the BT Ramayana
[Guest]: tournament which was like playing the World Cup those days you know I mean so I never
[Guest]: succeeded in getting into the team but I was always in the B team there was an A team and
[Guest]: a B team I think the school people understood that there are lots of kids who have to be
[Guest]: accommodated so they created a B team so you always waited in the wings you know to take
[Guest]: the place of a person who's injured or you know I mean who's sort of out or whatever
[Guest]: so you carry drinks to the field and come out and so that cricketing thing was very
[Guest]: very important because hockey was another thing in our school Ashish Balar was our contemporary
[Guest]: and he was he later went on to play for India and then Rojo Bini and Syed Mustafa Hussain
[Guest]: Kirmani were the alumnus of this school and 1983 the Prudential Cup thing was a big moment
[Guest]: because they had won the cup and I think Bini had taken 18 wickets or something like that
[Guest]: if I remember right and Kirmani was a big hero so they were invited to the school and
[Guest]: I was given the opportunity to speak at the assembly so and invite them and I was some
[Guest]: kind of a school leader you know I mean there were different houses and I was the captain
[Guest]: of the Nehru house so I was expected to invite them on to this whole thing and then I did
[Guest]: that and that again rubbed off on me and then so I was always again shuttling between cricket
[Guest]: and hockey and I thought I should be a hockey star when the school won a tournament in hockey
[Guest]: then I thought no no no hockey is my calling then then you saw cricket and the paraphernalia
[Guest]: that you know pads and you know you actually went to cricket because you like the gloves
[Guest]: or you like the pads you like the bat and you like the name Schlesinger written on it
[Guest]: or whatever and then of course television was reiterating that ambition and you were
[Guest]: seeing all this and then you had these stars who were coming and watching you play in the
[Guest]: morning you know I mean Bini used to be there in the grounds or Kirmani would come occasionally
[Guest]: and then and I had a classmate called Krishna Prasad who went on to play I think the under
[Guest]: 15 for India or something he went to England those days and I don't know what has happened
[Guest]: to him but then he was there and Rahul Dravid was playing for the St. Joseph's he was my
[Guest]: contemporary again so so they sent a batch of students for these selections to the KSE
[Guest]: the Chinnaswamy stadium and I was not one of them but then I thought this is very unfair
[Guest]: on the school's part I was a wicket keeper and an opening bat so I thought I should just
[Guest]: go and try my luck and there was Ian James I mean Anglo-Indian boy called Ian James I
[Guest]: don't know what's again happened to him I'm not followed he used to open the bowling thing
[Guest]: and they were all there they were sent for the selections and some of us who wanted to
[Guest]: very badly be there were not there so I think a three or four of us you know decided that
[Guest]: let's just go and take a chance we'll just land up there and just also bowl or bat or
[Guest]: you know keep wickets so I went there and I still remember Dravid coming and playing
[Guest]: and then Dravid keeping the wickets and AV Jai Prakash who later sort of you know gave
[Guest]: this 10 out of 10 to Anil Kumble was the selector so of course we didn't get selected and then
[Guest]: I then my I think my father was noticing all this and he said see you don't have to always
[Guest]: be a player you can also you can enjoy the game like I do you can sort of you know mean
[Guest]: enjoy it and you focus on your studies I think that's more important so that's when I sort
[Guest]: of turned my back to cricket and got involved in studies and so I got into science which
[Guest]: was actually a kind of natural thing to happen because there are two reasons for that my
[Guest]: mother's side they had an engineering college and they were pretty wealthy my father's side
[Guest]: was more into education because my grandmother herself was English educated that's my father's
[Guest]: mother she was a fantastic chess player and she used to read novels in Kannada and English
[Guest]: and for me the sight of my grandmother still today is not about she being in the kitchen
[Guest]: or making pickles or anything like that or making papadums or whatever which is the usual
[Guest]: thing but she playing chess with my father so this lady was used to consume novels in
[Guest]: Kannada like nobody's business and I think that she also pushed my mother to do a bit
[Guest]: of that so that reading of the two women in the family was very very crucial and all my
[Guest]: aunts we were a joint family living in Maleswaram a locality that was created the turn of the
[Guest]: century because of plague and people had a new locality had to be created and so there
[Guest]: my aunts were there they were all into music you know they were all performing artists
[Guest]: so there was a lot of music happening bhajan happening and my grandfather in the evenings
[Guest]: used to recite from Jaimini Bharata which is a 16th 17th century you know Mahabharata
[Guest]: written in Kannada then Kumar Vyasa Bharata tell us stories about it and these two women
[Guest]: used to go to the circulating library bring all the pulp fiction read and you know I mean
[Guest]: cry and keep you know I mean sobbing over you know some passage in the thing or the
[Guest]: thing about a character you know the death of a character or whatever and we used to
[Guest]: wonder what all this was and but it had an effect on you and so this one side it was
[Guest]: the mainstream thing coming from your father who's actually putting you into it and then
[Guest]: then you're seeing your grandmother and your mother doing this without you know in doing
[Guest]: it in a completely different way and then there is your patriarchal grandfather who's
[Guest]: finished his evening chores and then sitting and reading it like in the traditional times
[Guest]: you know reciting from it so this was the kind of environment that I had at home and
[Guest]: then you were you're seeing Western magazines come home you're seeing books you're seeing
[Guest]: your aunts perform Carnatic classical music and and so so this is the kind of environment
[Guest]: and by I went into science because you know I mean I think the primary thing was also
[Guest]: because there was an engineering college that my grandfather maternal grandfather ran with
[Guest]: his couple of our I mean a few of our other relatives and so there was a seat that was
[Guest]: guaranteed and there was also this long-term thing that I should probably become an administrator
[Guest]: of that thing because then they were all first-generation entrepreneurs who had made the money and they
[Guest]: were into construction business building dams and bridges and roads and highways all that
[Guest]: so they had made money and they were all very close to the Ram Krishna Hegde regime and
[Guest]: they had got a license to run this college and so there was that kind of it was I think
[Guest]: intellect it was mapped in the minds of my my mother especially that I should sort of
[Guest]: probably do that so I got into science and getting into science was not difficult because
[Guest]: I had decent scores in my SSLC but then once I got into my PCMB course it's physics chemistry
[Guest]: mathematics and biology at the National College which is again a great institution I was there
[Guest]: almost ambushed by a very good English teacher called Mr. Badrinath so he used to he used
[Guest]: to teach English extremely well he made it very very interesting for for us so there
[Guest]: was an environment at home which already sort of you know I mean put you into that kind
[Guest]: of you know I mean gave you that orientation but here was a man and for the first time
[Guest]: it was an external influence and of course there were other intellectuals coming home
[Guest]: you know D.R. Nagraj all the big names they were all juniors in age to my father so they
[Guest]: all used to come home you know stay for long periods have food so that was all there but
[Guest]: this man had a great influence on me and he I think is now a professor somewhere in Canada
[Guest]: I'm not I'm not in touch with him and he did his PhD in sociology he was a very young man
[Guest]: he had himself just finished his MA and was teaching younger people so there at that point
[Guest]: I started thinking whether I whether it was engineering that I really wanted to or medicine
[Guest]: that I really want to do so I quietly started writing poetry and bad poetry in English and
[Guest]: reasonably okay poetry in Kannada that's when that's that's my assessment because at least
[Guest]: the Kannada poems got published here and there so the English ones never saw the light of
[Guest]: the day and I still keep that diary of English poems that I wrote which I feel very embarrassed
[Guest]: looking at now so you all you pick the biggest words in the dictionary and try to play with
[Guest]: it you know the usual things that all of us do when we are starting this whole exercise
[Guest]: so so this Bhadrinath was a kind of influence who sort of shifted my focus away from he
[Guest]: was also an engineering student by the way I had given up this if I remember all this
[Guest]: correctly and he had given up his sciences and had come into humanities and was doing
[Guest]: a great job so and he wore a dhoti and a white dhoti and a white kurta and came to class
[Guest]: to teach so there was some some spiritual element in my head which was associated with
[Guest]: a simplicity and all that and I never went to ask why he wore as a young man now I mean
[Guest]: a couple of pictures that I see now he's wearing a suit and all that but those days I think
[Guest]: it was some strange idealism that was there there was already another teacher called Professor
[Guest]: G Ramakrishna who had studied in England was a professor of English professor of Sanskrit
[Guest]: professor of Kannada and I think it had expertise in all the three languages and I'm still in
[Guest]: touch with him is a great man and he wore this Gandhian attire I mean he was also at
[Guest]: the National College but at another branch of the National College so so he was his student
[Guest]: and I finally became Dr. G Ramakrishna student also when I went to the National College Basundi
[Guest]: to do my BA in English literature sociology and economics so after my pre-university I
[Guest]: got into an engineering college but I went and told my father that I think I want to
[Guest]: do literature like you so I thought there would be resistance but you know the first
[Guest]: thing my father said was I'm very happy that you have made this decision but don't tell
[Guest]: your mother the way you told me I will convince her but you know you you sort of do what you
[Guest]: want to do so I think I think that's a very very rare thing for the father he was very
[Guest]: happy that I wanted to do English literature and my father was very good with his Kannada
[Guest]: and all that but his I don't think he ever dabbled in writing in English or speaking
[Guest]: in English you know I mean it was he was his Kannada only kind of a thing but with a very
[Guest]: good reading of English classics and English literature and European literature and all
[Guest]: that so he was I think he was quite a quite a liberal father and I mean hugely liberal
[Guest]: father who said don't worry about your mother I will tell her but once my mother came to
[Guest]: know of it I think she told her father and her father sort of ridiculed my decision and
[Guest]: then my grandfather here he is he influenced my paternal grandfather and he was also very
[Guest]: upset and I think they were all they did not speak to me properly until I finished my degree
[Guest]: you know BA in sociology English and economics so but then of course you know they all reconciled
[Guest]: because they saw me sort of going abroad and doing things well and so they all came back
[Guest]: later but then nobody sort of made a good prognosis of my thing you know not that I
[Guest]: was going to make a lot of money or get a Nobel Prize or something like that but then
[Guest]: you know I mean they did not give me a chance but my father gave me a chance he said this
[Guest]: is fine it's great you do what you want to do but he said whatever you do I want you
[Guest]: to be the best now it's like telling fathers telling their sons that even if you're a shoeshine
[Guest]: boy be the best I don't think they would have literally meant it but then you know that
[Guest]: was the kind of encouragement and then he then I started accompanying him to seminars
[Guest]: where he was speaking or his you know I mean I used to start started looking at his editing
[Guest]: process very closely his table used to be stacked up with manuscripts of young writers
[Guest]: you know used to get up at 4 in the morning and you know I mean I mean I've written about
[Guest]: it somewhere and I think the introduction to my translation of his plays he wrote mind
[Guest]: plays during the emergency so so that is the only mind plays that exist in Canada even
[Guest]: to this day so I translated it much later around I think 2004 for which I got the science
[Guest]: academy prize also so I think in the introduction of that I speak about how I saw my father
[Guest]: you know waking up and sitting at the table and he looking at his manuscript and there's
[Guest]: a serenity a picture of serenity which I portray so so this was happening and at the same time
[Guest]: when I was doing my BA my mother you know she was a homemaker and I think she had started
[Guest]: accessing a different set of novels which were in translation and this is fascinating
[Guest]: because again translation comes back into my life in a different way and this time my
[Guest]: grandmother is out of the picture because she is passed on and we have moved to another
[Guest]: house because my father needed to be closer to his institution college to he couldn't
[Guest]: travel long distances because he had become diabetic and we wanted to cut his travel time
[Guest]: in the morning so we were in a separate setting now where it was not a joint family it was
[Guest]: a nuclear family and my mother had started accessing translations of Bengali novels into
[Guest]: Canada which was published by Kavyalaya in Mysore and this was the entire Tagore this
[Guest]: was all of Bimal Mitra then this was you know I mean Bhatir Panchali into Kannada and all
[Guest]: of it was translated by a great soul called Aho Balashankara he had translated 4,000-5,000
[Guest]: pages of literature into Kannada from the Bengali originally had learned Bengali and
[Guest]: yet translated them into Kannada and he was with the free press journal and then of course
[Guest]: he also learned Malayalam and translated Nambudripad's autobiography into Kannada there's a great
[Guest]: man but you know in those days when she was reading this and telling me you know summaries
[Guest]: of what is happening in those mega novels written in the 19th century Bengal and you
[Guest]: know there was also this affinity to Sharada and Ramakrishna Paramahamsa and all that in
[Guest]: the house anyway Bengal nationalism and Bengal Bengali culture was the elite culture of the
[Guest]: time so it had an influence on all literate I mean all families middle class families
[Guest]: and so they came through Sharada I mean Sharada or through Ramakrishna Paramahamsa or through
[Guest]: Vivekananda into all our households and there was a big you know photograph in my grandfather's
[Guest]: you know I mean it was a pretty huge thing frame of Vivekananda the Hindu monk of India
[Guest]: you know standing like this with a nice coat and so it had come into our house like that
[Guest]: and so Bengali was an idea that sort of some of got into the culture and there was this
[Guest]: translations now so the so she was reading accessing all the classics and translation
[Guest]: and I don't mean she was not interpreting it like my father was a literary literature
[Guest]: man trying to do that but she would tell me stories you know I mean tell me see this is
[Guest]: happening and so this fellow is going to die oh this is I think he has wasted some 25 pages
[Guest]: writing on this why should he do that he can come straight to this story so there was a
[Guest]: very different kind of kitchen you know she's cooking and she would tell me these stories
[Guest]: and I got interested and I started reading for me it was not Tagore it was not Bimal
[Guest]: Mitra it was not Bankim Chandra it was Ahobal Shankara I was reading the so powerful translation
[Guest]: can sort of come to you in such a powerful thing I only much later realized this Ahobal
[Guest]: Shankara was none other than the maternal uncle of Akumal Ramchandra who discovered
[Guest]: Harald Szepinski the abstract expressionist and got a 32 page profile in the New York
[Guest]: at those times you know in the 80s so this is there was a Telugu Brahmin family I mean
[Guest]: so this man was had translated all this so translation started coming into me in a completely
[Guest]: different way again so that again made my reading and my looking at the world and the
[Guest]: worldview that I had to know this whole idea of the world you started coming in you know
[Guest]: you need to have a worldview because you know you had started I had started reading Lankesh
[Guest]: by then and Lankesh I tell you all of European politics today there's so much happening in
[Guest]: Russia and Ukraine and all that but those days you did not have access to the internet
[Guest]: there was no internet in the first place you could not have got subscribed to an economist
[Guest]: or you could not have subscribed to a Mother Jones or something else or New York Times
[Guest]: so all that you got to know about the about international events or personalities came
[Guest]: to you through some very enlightened writers in Canada like P. Lankesh there was another
[Guest]: one called Sita Ramayya VC we used to call her V. Sita Ramayya he used to subscribe to
[Guest]: the Times Literary Supplement those days he wrote on economics and all that but then he
[Guest]: was of an older generation much older generation to Lankesh and Lankesh used to tell us about
[Guest]: what's happening with Mitterrand what's happening in Germany what's happening in America and
[Guest]: used to write as if he is there and talking to all those personalities used to he had
[Guest]: brilliant prose and when he when when Gowri passed away and I was interviewed on Gowri
[Guest]: I said see don't get me wrong Gowri was not the great journalist or great writer it was
[Guest]: her father and her father always came across to me as a French modernist because he used
[Guest]: to write so much on European culture and he had made Steffi Graf a household name and
[Guest]: he used to call his dog Steffi right so you know you he sort of presented material to
[Guest]: you in a very very fascinating fashion and that's when I thought that you have to write
[Guest]: you have to have a worldview you have to be rooted but at the same time you have to present
[Guest]: the material before you in a very interesting fashion you shouldn't you know write with
[Guest]: 2,000 footnotes and I mean 100 pages of whatever you know I mean which doesn't sort of communicate
[Guest]: what you have to make it interesting for people and getting people to read you and their attention
[Guest]: spans you know I mean fixing their attention spans is far more important and interesting
[Guest]: and challenging than sort of you know just writing and you know I mean letting your ego
[Guest]: you know be there all the way all I mean in all places so I think Lankesh was a very decisive
[Guest]: influence and then at the same time you know I mean it's it's it's so happened that I've
[Guest]: been lucky Amit that there is Lankesh who's trying to give you these lessons there's your
[Guest]: father who's being a just gentle mentor and then there is I was also not completely alien
[Guest]: to abstract ideas and theorization and the culture of insight as I call it you know it's
[Guest]: not the culture of it's not empirical you know I mean stacking up of data which was
[Guest]: important but you know trying to look at a culture of I mean trying to develop a culture
[Guest]: of insight you know so my father used to always tell me that you shall not write anything
[Guest]: if you don't have an insight and something new to say so it's not just you just you know
[Guest]: put things together and then say that this is your piece no you have to have something
[Guest]: to say until then don't write and don't make writing so easy for yourself which of course
[Guest]: you know I could not have done as a journalist later but but then I later realized the importance
[Guest]: of the culture of insight which he sort of taught me but abstraction was another thing
[Guest]: which you know trying to sort of look at abstract ideas you know I had become interested a little
[Guest]: bit in Barth, Rolla Barth at that time and then but I but you know Barth or Foucault
[Guest]: and Derrida I'm I sort of came to study formally later but you know I mean in my BA and whatever
[Guest]: there was this great literary critic in Canada and a cultural thinker in Canada called Kevin
[Guest]: Narayan and Kevin Narayan was the one who introduced me to Chomsky's linguistics and
[Guest]: I mean ideas of our ideas on language and then also and he had this enormous ability
[Guest]: he was he was the teacher of D.R. Nagraj also and he had this enormous ability to theorize
[Guest]: things in a way you know I mean look at something and say that okay this is the kind of broad
[Guest]: structure into which it fell so I was fascinated by the way he designed his ideas you know
[Guest]: conceptually put them in boxes and he was a sort of student of science too so he's bringing
[Guest]: his knowledge of science and learning and all that into looking at literature and making
[Guest]: literature look more like science there was a phase in Canada when you know you they thought
[Guest]: of making it very precise and you know I mean speaking of it like quantum theory or whatever
[Guest]: so there was that phase which I learned immensely from that phase because abstraction and theoretical
[Guest]: ideas and how to build you know and put things in a larger frame how to put them in a context
[Guest]: how to sort of link them and how to sort of bring this culture of insight into all of
[Guest]: that all of this started happening inside me and now it's you know it's just that as
[Guest]: I sit here and reflect with you I feel surprised that all these processes processes have happened
[Guest]: inside me I mean you're giving me an opportunity to sort of you know I mean reflect on these
[Guest]: I'm just having a free flow thing with you but I was not conscious of all these things
[Guest]: so this is how things I think get into anybody's mind anybody's personality and shapes you
[Guest]: into a person that you finally become or are constantly becoming you know I mean so I think
[Guest]: that was happening with me and Narayan was a huge influence Badrinath was an influence
[Guest]: my father was a constant force and my mother was doing this something which is very fascinating
[Guest]: and my grandmother was doing something and my grandfather I still keep his Jaimini Bharata
[Guest]: in my study today even today even to this day it's a old thing the fat thick text and
[Guest]: so classical traditional modern European Lankesh trying to take you across the seas now Lankesh
[Guest]: never crossed the seas Lankesh never went abroad but he wrote about Europe as if it
[Guest]: was his you know I mean the gully next door you know I mean he he wrote so insightfully
[Guest]: about Hemingway he wrote so much about Spanish Civil War he wrote so much about the Mitra
[Guest]: Mitra France then he is the one who told us about this great writer called Borges he said
[Guest]: there is this you should read Latin American writers and then there was another idea which
[Guest]: of course there was a secular environment which I now called secular but then it was
[Guest]: a very organic environment those days but I my father and Lankesh were friends and it
[Guest]: was a very strange kind of friendship because my father was spoke very little so but Lankesh
[Guest]: always used to sort of talk to him and my father would listen and probably respond a
[Guest]: week later or something like that I still have cards that Lankesh would write and my
[Guest]: my father would send a card and then stick a I mean another card asking him to respond
[Guest]: because he would I think that was a practice you know you would just spin that and Lankesh
[Guest]: would just sign at the bottom empty so I have many cards like that at home so so Lankesh
[Guest]: and my father had this thing and once my father I think he would never visit his office he
[Guest]: was already a very famous journalist and a writer and much much bigger than I mean you
[Guest]: can imagine you know I mean I would you know in the Kannada space you know and I it is
[Guest]: Lankesh who's much much bigger than a Karnad or an Anant Murthy or whoever so I mean because
[Guest]: he had the masses and he had the classes on a side and I went to see him once and then
[Guest]: he asked me very strangely he asked me tell me the names of your friends you know I mean
[Guest]: it's very strange thing question to be asked and I named a few and then he said but there
[Guest]: is no Muslim name in it there's no Christian name in it you should you should have you
[Guest]: should have a Muslim friend you should have a Christian friend I mean it is almost like
[Guest]: didactic you know telling you that go and get these people into your life also so your
[Guest]: life becomes richer that's all he said and then I mean he spoke about nothing else and
[Guest]: then he was very dismissive about this and that and he was very erratic in his thing
[Guest]: and very brusque in his you know expression so we one wouldn't want to stay there for
[Guest]: too long and my father was a teetotaler and Lankesh always enjoyed his drink and all that
[Guest]: so so we just came back and but Lankesh was a huge huge influence so all of these things
[Guest]: were happening in my early life and then after my BA I mean I had finished my thing and then
[Guest]: I got a seat at the Central University of Hyderabad in the English department and that
[Guest]: was another huge huge change because for the first time I was going outside of home it
[Guest]: was not very far off as Hyderabad but still you know it was like flying abroad so you
[Guest]: you went and you put yourself in a hostel and then there are these students from postgraduate
[Guest]: students from the computer applications department computer was a big thing just about getting
[Guest]: off the thing and then there were students of doing PhD in physics and then you're interacting
[Guest]: with all these fellows sitting in the hostel at your dining table and then I was also introduced
[Guest]: there to radical student politics you know I mean Hyderabad was a hotbed of radical politics
[Guest]: student politics and I it so happened that I became a roommate of a person who was on
[Guest]: the extreme left and later that person became the son-in-law of Varvara Rao right so K Satyanarayana
[Guest]: so he had contested an election new student body election and then I mean innocently you
[Guest]: went and campaigned and then that's also when I realized that you know I mean how ideologies
[Guest]: are constraining and limiting and they try to exclude you because how much of a loyalty
[Guest]: I showed these people they would never make me part of them never may never invite me
[Guest]: to their secret meetings so I felt very disturbed and then in my second MA I think I wrote a
[Guest]: letter saying that I have nothing to do with any of you so I still keep that letter which
[Guest]: a photocopy of that letter and so I thought that this is very limiting and then I got
[Guest]: back into my literature studies but literature studies literature department itself were
[Guest]: going through a transition at that time and there was this huge conflict about colonial
[Guest]: curriculum curriculums you know I mean so people who wanted to study Shakespeare seriously
[Guest]: or Shelley or the romantics or the key or Keats or Dunn or all these people were looked
[Guest]: down upon you know I mean are you what is it that you're doing you know you're you're
[Guest]: studying only what the British has asked you to study there's these are canonical texts
[Guest]: there's so much that's happening in America and post-structuralism and structuralism that
[Guest]: have dismantled this whole idea of education etc. etc. etc. so this was being constantly
[Guest]: being thrown at us by one or two teachers and one of them later happened to become my
[Guest]: MPhil and PhD guides Tejaswini Niranjana and it so happened that Niranjana's father and
[Guest]: my father again they had this teacher-student relationship and it was a lifelong very very
[Guest]: good relationship and I mean so she was she had just come back from the United States
[Guest]: I mean I think she had she had done a PhD and she had come back and she was very high
[Guest]: on literary theory and Foucault and Derry all of that and she wanted I mean she wanted
[Guest]: us to read all of that you know and I really appreciate what happened at that phase but
[Guest]: then you know it was trying to sort of make you look at your what you had until then thought
[Guest]: was literature and I mean it put a lot of questions on that and that was welcome because
[Guest]: you know you reconciled your new exposure and your old thing later much later and it
[Guest]: sort of blend beautifully inside you but then at that point it was a kind of a disruption
[Guest]: for me and then I mean so I moved from the literature department after MA after I got
[Guest]: a good MA degree into the comparative literature department for my PhD and I chose her as my
[Guest]: guide and I again because I was so familiar with the idea of translations and Ramanujan
[Guest]: was a friend of ours you know he used to come home and I still keep letters of it that between
[Guest]: my father and him and so he used to I mean out of the blue write to my father in an airmail
[Guest]: saying that I need this book Raju can you please keep it for me I'll be coming on such
[Guest]: and such a date I'll pick it up from you and then he was very interested in some of the
[Guest]: poets that my father had published so he would say that this man is the next Adiga so Gopal
[Guest]: Krishna Adiga is another very big name in Kannada and a stalwart of person who sort
[Guest]: of shaped the Navya movement in Kannada and Ananthamurthy and others were all influenced
[Guest]: by him big man but a Jansangh he contested on a Jansangh ticket now that's a separate
[Guest]: thing now how ideologies again did not matter when it came to literature because his literature
[Guest]: was good so I mean I used to when he had a he had a stroke and he could not write my
[Guest]: father used to send me to his house great man and he would sort of I was I used to write
[Guest]: down what he would tell me and then you know I mean that's how I became very very close
[Guest]: to him before he passed away I think in 93 or so I'm not sure about the date but then
[Guest]: so he was another person but then coming back to Hyderabad and this literary experience
[Guest]: and this new challenges that were being thrown at me and trying to sort of undo all that
[Guest]: I had thought was literature was a was a great thing and then there is also this little bit
[Guest]: of radical politics entering into your horizon because you were a protected boy from a family
[Guest]: which was had a literary orientation and you know and very cultural kind of a thing and
[Guest]: suddenly you're being asked hard I mean being told that there are harsh realities there
[Guest]: and this is all useless you know I mean your poetry is useless because it's very romantic
[Guest]: after all it's about individuals you know you should write poetry for the society and
[Guest]: that's when I very seriously when I came home for a holiday thing I took an anthology of
[Guest]: socialist verse with me which was in my father's library by Alan bold it was edited by Alan
[Guest]: bold and it had even to this day it's the most delightful anthology that I've ever read
[Guest]: you know I mean I read Neruda for the first time there I read Mayakovsky I read Vasco
[Guest]: Popper I read a lot of people and used to you know translate a few of them that I liked
[Guest]: and I would keep them so so so so I started opening up myself to bigger questions that
[Guest]: were being asked so there's not just literature there was this not this cozy relationship
[Guest]: of stories and there's not that literary questions or literary criticism and framing and abstract
[Guest]: whatever ideas within a certain area and being familiar with the registers of literature
[Guest]: and literary criticism but also larger questions that concern society and those questions were
[Guest]: thrown at me without my asking suddenly in the hostels of the University of Hyderabad
[Guest]: Central University of Hyderabad so that sort of again so I my mother's dream again because
[Guest]: right from my childhood she would make me listen to the AIR news at nine o'clock and
[Guest]: she had kept a diary and I had to write the headlines and show it to her and then I would
[Guest]: be allowed to go to sleep so that was the ritual that was practiced for years and apparently
[Guest]: she did that because she wanted me to be an IAS officer and one of my father's colleagues
[Guest]: had written the UPSC exams and had become an IAS officer not not so much an IAS officer
[Guest]: but he had become the postmaster general I mean another service which you get if you
[Guest]: get a slightly lesser score so so she wanted me to be an IAS officer and then I as officer
[Guest]: the connotation was of power and you know you know prestige and all that so I think
[Guest]: she had driven that into me or put that into my head and it was there somewhere in the
[Guest]: back of my mind so so now that you've not done engineering at least do this you know
[Guest]: I mean you know that kind of a thing but that was also completely shattered when I went
[Guest]: to Hyderabad you know I I thought that this was gulamgiri of a different kind you know
[Guest]: I mean of course you know I mean later some of the finest bureaucrats became my friends
[Guest]: and friends of our family and they still nurtured me and great men but you know at that point
[Guest]: of time you know I mean this this whole disruption is happening and then literature is being
[Guest]: exploded so everything is being exploded in your mind and even this idea got exploded
[Guest]: so I never took the UPSC exams and my mother was even to this day I think she's terribly
[Guest]: terribly disappointed so when I became an editor and chief secretaries used to call
[Guest]: me up or principal secretaries used to come to see me I used to go back and tell her that
[Guest]: see you wanted me to be an IAS officer see so many of them come to see me today they
[Guest]: seek an appointment so but she was not very happy she said that's then something has gone
[Guest]: into your head so don't don't don't really think that you've become something so you
[Guest]: know she was still not convinced about it so this was so these ideas got exploded so
[Guest]: again you started looking at world very differently and I remember there all night people reading
[Guest]: out revolutionary verse you know the Telugu boys especially you know reading out Sri
[Guest]: Sri's poetry to me and saying that see look at this look at this is does your KS Narasimha
[Guest]: Swami write like this does your Gopal Krishna Adiga write like this is a reactionary so
[Guest]: they started labeling writers for me saying that he is this he is that why do you need
[Guest]: to read this fellow you know I mean oh Tolstoy you know I mean here's something else no that's
[Guest]: not sufficient you know I mean so so so these things completely changed in my mind around
[Guest]: that time so this is then I am sort of there and doing my PhD and then I've picked a very
[Guest]: interesting subject because translations is very dear to me I thought I'll become a translator
[Guest]: in my life you know that was an academic researching on translations doing literary translations
[Guest]: I've never meant to be a journalist I was never study I never studied journalism so
[Guest]: I picked on nationalism and translations the idea of nationalism and run because my PhD
[Guest]: guide Tejaswini Niranjana had done her work on translations and so I thought I mean I
[Guest]: think we discussed this and we thought I thought I should look at the the early translations
[Guest]: of modern Kannada literature and try to see why those translations happened so linking
[Guest]: it up with Kannada sub-nationalism linking up with nationalism so I was trying to look
[Guest]: at that and of course she was putting a very heavy theoretical framework and she was not
[Guest]: very enthusiastic about the local literature that I was discovering and showing it to her
[Guest]: so at some point I felt very slighted that she's not interested in what I'm showing it's
[Guest]: it's a one-way thing so I suddenly decided I will not I'll take a break from doing PhD
[Guest]: go back to Bangalore for some time and then probably I mean I was still very young so
[Guest]: I thought I'll always come back to do my PhD and in I mean at that time also there was
[Guest]: this huge subaltern history conference that happened in Hyderabad so there was Gayatri
[Guest]: Chakravorty Spivak there was Ranjit Guha all these people congregating and I wasn't volunteer
[Guest]: to that whole thing and at that time there was the Deccan Herald and Prajavani people
[Guest]: the Sunday there was an editor who I was looking after that and he said this is happening I
[Guest]: mean I had spoken to him very interestingly about the idea of subaltern history why it
[Guest]: is interesting how it is different and I think I had spoken to him at length about Shaheed
[Guest]: Amin's piece on Gandhi as Mahatma or something like that you know I mean I think I remember
[Guest]: speaking to him about it and then he got very fascinated he said why don't you write a long
[Guest]: series so I said I'll do a three-part series on subaltern history for you and I wrote a
[Guest]: three-part series on subaltern history for the Kannada newspaper which also got into
[Guest]: the English newspaper later I wrote in Kannada for Prajavani primarily so that made me a
[Guest]: bit of a local you know I mean antenna went up people started saying over we read your
[Guest]: piece so there was this instant recognition and there was this crisis happening in my
[Guest]: PhD program so I thought I can do some journalism some cultural journalism literature literary
[Guest]: journalism and then go back to my academics so that's when I came back home and again
[Guest]: I met my father I used to take this overnight bus if you don't get you didn't if you didn't
[Guest]: get a train ticket you took an overnight bus with which used to play movies all night on
[Guest]: that you know I mean they used to have a television set and Anu Malik's music used to run all
[Guest]: through night and it was terrible you know those journeys but then I landed up in Bangalore
[Guest]: at six o'clock and my father was up he was a very early riser so he was having his coffee
[Guest]: he said oh I mean you've come back I said yeah I want to tell you something I didn't
[Guest]: even wait for anything I said this is what I've decided I'll go after a point of time
[Guest]: I don't want to sort of pursue it now because I don't feel happy so is that so why should
[Guest]: you be worried okay again he was very cool about it he said did not ever tell me that
[Guest]: you should no no no this is not the way to do it I mean I enough tell my son that you
[Guest]: know me no no no don't take the breaks that I took you may never go back to what you want
[Guest]: to do so but he never said said that he said okay good you know I mean fine that's all
[Guest]: that's all fine you know I mean if you're not happy you shouldn't do it so you'll always
[Guest]: sort of you know understand as to why you need to do it so you'll go back to it so and
[Guest]: that phase when I came back and then there was nothing to do and I was reading and reading
[Guest]: consuming literature again and you know when trying to read biographies at that time you
[Guest]: know I mean I was reading all this kind of stuff that was coming up after the breakup
[Guest]: of the Soviet Union I think there was a string of biographies that was coming out in the
[Guest]: West which was dismantling the character of people like Brecht or Einstein or making them
[Guest]: look like you know I mean trying to speak so heavily about their private lives and and
[Guest]: the I mean trying to break the icon of these you know the it was an iconographic kind of
[Guest]: a thing iconoclastic sorry iconoclastic kind of a biographies that were coming out and
[Guest]: I was reading all of that and then suddenly one day my father had another very elderly
[Guest]: writer friend who said if Sugata is doing nothing Girish Kasarwadi is making a movie
[Guest]: why doesn't he sort of you know go and spend some time with him so I just went to Girish
[Guest]: Kasarwadi's house and he was so welcoming and he said see I'm making this movie called
[Guest]: Kravya it's based on the short story so you read the short story and come tomorrow let's
[Guest]: discuss so I just read the short story and I next day I had a lot of ideas because of
[Guest]: course you wanted to prove that you know you've you've you've come out you've come out of
[Guest]: university and then you've read all these new things and you have great ideas and so
[Guest]: I started discussing and we used to discuss with three four hours and he was very patient
[Guest]: with me and he liked a lot of ideas and then I mean I sort of did a conceptual design for
[Guest]: the film which you know means it was very interesting project for eight or ten months
[Guest]: and then when Girish Kasarwadi finally released the movie I was thrilled of course I didn't
[Guest]: get paid because it was I was volunteering or he never sort of drew up a contract for
[Guest]: me but then this in the in the scroll in the credit scroll my name was right at right on
[Guest]: top with B. V. Karanth and you know I mean that happened that that that kind of joy and
[Guest]: you know you jumped off the chair and I mean I told my father see can you see by name it's
[Guest]: with the great B. V. Karanth and B. V. Karanth my father were great friends again they used
[Guest]: to come to premia together to buy books and they used to go to Koshi's and have a coffee
[Guest]: and then disperse in fact Ram Gohar mentions it in his obituary recently for I mean Shan
[Guest]: Bagh Mr. Shan Bagh so I mean I was very happy and I thought oh I mean I mean I can do a
[Guest]: lot of things there is movies there is these people have published a series for me you
[Guest]: know in Deccan Herald so I mean I can do journalism and I can do all this for the next two or
[Guest]: three years and then go back to academics so I sort of very promptly applied for a job
[Guest]: in Deccan Herald and I mean my application went up to Mr. Hari Kumar and then of course
[Guest]: you know with all the you were bragging about yourself that you've done this you've done
[Guest]: this and you read this and all that so he called me for an interview and that interview
[Guest]: went on for easily more than an hour for a trainee's position and there he sort of started
[Guest]: discouraging me at the end of the interview saying that you're not meant for journalism
[Guest]: he said you won't fit into this whole scheme you don't know how a newsroom runs so you
[Guest]: just think because you've written a article you think you can become a journalist no that's
[Guest]: not how journalism that's not what journalism does so I kept you know I needed this job
[Guest]: so I kept telling him that no sir I mean I can I can be very useful to you I can do cultural
[Guest]: journalism and I at that point of time I never thought I'll do politics or write on politics
[Guest]: or it was only about literature and culture and things like that so then he sort of gave
[Guest]: a very strange offer he said okay I'll allow you two months in the newsroom then come back
[Guest]: and tell me if you like it I'll give you a trainee's job so I had to work for two months
[Guest]: without pay in Deccan Herald you know writing and collecting my bylines and then filing
[Guest]: it with the executive editor and saying see I've done all this so why don't you give me
[Guest]: a job so at the end of two months after much persuasion prodding and nodding and all that
[Guest]: he gave me a trainee's job and for a princely sum of about two thousand rupees those days
[Guest]: and that was you know I mean some and Prajawani and Deccan Herald that group was immensely
[Guest]: respected at that time it was a number one paper the times was nowhere in the picture
[Guest]: those days which year was this this is 95 1995 so times was nowhere in the picture it
[Guest]: was it was torturing so to say Express had its own problems and Hindu was a very mild
[Guest]: presence you know I mean as it is today in Karnataka so this was the number one paper
[Guest]: and if you and it and had and it had Sunday Herald and articulations books it used to
[Guest]: be a thriving paper so you got into it then you thought you were you had arrived so but
[Guest]: he took a liking to me once I sort of was confirmed as a trainee he took a liking to
[Guest]: me and then instantly decided to send me abroad on an assignment and there was this Bombay
[Guest]: was the minister of HRD and then he was going to Moscow for some cultural festival he said
[Guest]: send so get there and I was a trainee so he was extraordinarily generous that and then
[Guest]: of course it raised the eyebrows of all the seniors in the newsroom all that happened
[Guest]: but then somehow he took a liking to me and then I mean I thought I should exploit that
[Guest]: thing and then I wrote a note to him in 96 and I'd by then be become a regular journalist
[Guest]: and I mean my training training period was over one year become a regular journalist
[Guest]: I said Jacques Derrida has come to India I have some understanding of his writings and
[Guest]: his philosophy and his and the polemics that surrounds it so if you permit me I will go
[Guest]: to Delhi and interview him I just wrote I without even asking Jacques Derrida if you
[Guest]: want to give me an interview so I wrote and he used to sort of have a very strange way
[Guest]: of saying yes he used to just write an okay at the edge of the paper so that okay came
[Guest]: back so they bought me a ticket and I went to landed up in Delhi and attended the lectures
[Guest]: of Jacques Derrida at the Delhi School of Economics it was on the short history of the
[Guest]: lie and then I somehow wanted his to draw his attention and get a get an appointment
[Guest]: with him and ask him a few questions and I was trying to very seriously brush up my French
[Guest]: you know tuta puta kind of a French and all that but then you know I sent a note and left
[Guest]: it with one of those people who are accompanying him and they very promptly called me and it
[Guest]: was very strange you know people are so generous and kind at times you don't know why they
[Guest]: pick you or what I was his rookie fellow you know I mean with absolutely no background
[Guest]: and then they called me he said see Mr. Derrida will be free for about 15 minutes you can
[Guest]: ask him whatever you want just before he starts this other lecture so I went and I honestly
[Guest]: don't remember what I asked him I didn't have a tape recorder to record I think I had a
[Guest]: record or something some very old tape some very strange thing so I asked him about Gandhi
[Guest]: asked him about Chomsky and I asked him about his own thing one or two things of chromatology
[Guest]: a few questions very very academic theoretical something that would not fit into a journalistic
[Guest]: piece that I had to write I had been sent to write so I came by I was very happy so
[Guest]: I went around telling that Derrida has given me an interview and I had taken a picture
[Guest]: with him so I had everything that one had to so this was just 10 or 15 minutes of his
[Guest]: tape but then I sat back in the room that night and I was staying at this tandoor hotel
[Guest]: what had become called a tandoor hotel and then I sat there there was this I still remember
[Guest]: the table was you know I mean it was a stone slab kind of a table and I said I should you
[Guest]: know I mean this is my great moment I should craft a piece which will appeal to a larger
[Guest]: Kannada audience and it I should introduce Derrida instead of saying that I interviewed
[Guest]: I should introduce him so I was reading Feynman at that time you know Richard Feynman's books
[Guest]: you know I mean you're surely joking Mr Feynman all the usual stuff that you read at that
[Guest]: age and then there was a poem that he had used in some different context I wonder why
[Guest]: I wonder why I wonder why I wonder why so I took that and I sort of tried to apply the
[Guest]: principles of deconstruction to that and then the question that I had made it a kichdi of
[Guest]: something but it had a narrative the most important thing was it had a kind of flow
[Guest]: and a narrative and when I gave it to my editor immediate editor here she said it's very good
[Guest]: so I was stunned that you know when I had pulled off something and it was published
[Guest]: as full two pages in Deccan Herald those days in the Sunday Herald I still have it full
[Guest]: two pages I don't think any newspaper would ever you know give space like that today even
[Guest]: I have been an editor of big newspapers I don't think I would I would think ten times
[Guest]: before giving that kind of real estate you know to any writer so they gave me two full
[Guest]: pages and my father was on cloud nine that day because you know I mean he thought his
[Guest]: son had arrived and he had bet see as a he was my father was also used to bring out little
[Guest]: magazines so he used to bring out a little magazine called Ankana then as a student he
[Guest]: had started a magazine called Vimochane and then this so this whole habit of betting on
[Guest]: people and writers it was a different kind of gamble was always and I think instinctually
[Guest]: was there in him so he thought probably at this time that my son's the better I put on
[Guest]: my son has worked so he's actually sort of pulled off something so because he was damn
[Guest]: thrilled because that day morning I think around 7.15 because I remember where we were
[Guest]: sitting and what we were doing and having coffee he got a call it was landline and D.R.
[Guest]: Nagraj was on the other side my father used to be called Mestre in the sense teacher Mestre
[Guest]: I read Sugata's piece has done a great job so my former and D.R. was a rising star in
[Guest]: Kannada those days and my father for my father to hear that from D.R. Nagraj was a very very
[Guest]: big thing and he said D.R. said this and he would not show it off but then he said good
[Guest]: great but don't stop here you know you have to read more your responsibility increases
[Guest]: because now the next time you make a mistake people will tear you apart now you are still
[Guest]: a young fellow and you are publishing only in Karnataka tomorrow you may have to write
[Guest]: for a bigger audience and people will not be as generous and kind so you have to be
[Guest]: more thorough you know you have to be pakka with what you write and always make margin
[Guest]: notes my father's books are always full of margin notes and pencil and all that and he
[Guest]: used to keep notes he used to tell me that you have to do that too so I mean that's a
[Guest]: habit that came to me also so I make a lot of notes when I read so that is something
[Guest]: that happened at that point of time so that was the big break and then next year Chomsky
[Guest]: came to India for the first time so again I wrote this thing and now I had a thing so
[Guest]: they said okay go and I and another good thing was Chomsky's PhD student was my linguistics
[Guest]: teacher at Hyderabad Central, Prabhaldas Gupta.
[Guest]: So I spoke to Prabhaldas Gupta and he said don't worry you come I'll get you access
[Guest]: so so I went and I met him and then I wrote pieces again then when Edward Said came I
[Guest]: did the same thing so I was more on this other side writing about literature, philosophy
[Guest]: and I mean big theoreticians people with big ideas in the world and trying to make news
[Guest]: out of them and trying to write features on them so that is how I framed my early journalism
[Guest]: which was again a very very accidental kind of a thing from literature trying to be an
[Guest]: academic and this academic thing I have to tell you this you know when I was going to
[Guest]: Hyderabad and because I was so close to Gopal Krishna Adiga the great poet in Canada had
[Guest]: just won the Kabir Sanman or something like that very big and there was this unhappiness
[Guest]: that he had not been given the Gnanpeet and his student or his I mean the person of the
[Guest]: next year Anant Moorthy had been given and there was this huge talk in Kannada literary
[Guest]: circles that oh Anant Moorthy had lobbied it would have actually been Gopal Krishna
[Guest]: Adiga because he was the trendsetter in Kannada and all that so I went to him and then he
[Guest]: said what do you want I have nothing to give you you've done so much for me he was he was
[Guest]: actually a quite a rebel actually you know I mean he had given up his jobs and his poetry
[Guest]: was something had a very humane and connected with me so I did something very stupid so
[Guest]: I told him I love this poem of yours it is so philosophical and it's so small can I
[Guest]: have it in your own hand I would like to frame it so he said okay get me a paper and get
[Guest]: me a pen which with good ink or whatever so I took a sketch pen and a big poster kind
[Guest]: a3 kind of sheet and went and gave it to him and the next day he had kept two copies there
[Guest]: I did not realize till that point he had had a stroke and he could not write and this man
[Guest]: did not want to deny me that I still keep it in my study it's the most precious thing
[Guest]: that I have of a great Kannada writer having written this poem for me and he gave me two
[Guest]: and he said see this there's too much of my hand is shaken a lot here I could not write
[Guest]: properly so when it stabilized a little I've written another one I kept both and I had
[Guest]: tears in my eyes and then he said Sugata you're going to Hyderabad you're going to a very
[Guest]: good university those days I think it was only JNU and HCU were the only two central
[Guest]: universities said you're going to a good place and when you come back you know people should
[Guest]: stand up and say call you professor Sugata and you know they should you know respect
[Guest]: you so you should I want you to do well of course I mean by the time I came back he was
[Guest]: gone so that was the kind of academic dream that my father put into me Adiga put into me
[Guest]: my mother of course was dreaming of something else but then this is the kind of intellectual
[Guest]: environment so I think I'll stop there and then probably wait for you to ask me the next
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for these remarkably rich recollections I have like 15-20 things to double down on
[Amit Varma]: I'll begin with this when you know when I first recorded with Ram Guha like this time
[Amit Varma]: I recorded my fifth episode with him but when I first recorded with him I think it would
[Amit Varma]: have been 2018 or so I forget the year we did a couple of episodes on Gandhi and I think
[Amit Varma]: when we recorded the second of them he said you want to come with me in the evening I'll
[Amit Varma]: be you know Rajmohan Gandhi's book on South India is being launched and I'll be chatting
[Amit Varma]: with him and I said sure I'll come so in the evening I went and Ram and Rajmohan were having
[Amit Varma]: a chat and it was like Shahrukh Khan and Amitabh Bachchan would have a chat in Bombay it was
[Amit Varma]: that kind of crowd like I was blown away there was like standing room only it was completely
[Amit Varma]: packed absolute pin drop silence when they were speaking incredible engagement from the
[Amit Varma]: audience when the audience questions came about and I thought to myself that my god
[Amit Varma]: if you had this in Mumbai you would have like four people and a dog show up right and not
[Amit Varma]: a dog because you don't allow dogs indoors but it would be like that and that was kind
[Amit Varma]: of my first exposure to sort of seeing this environment in Bangalore and subsequently
[Amit Varma]: I have come here I like to tell people that you know Church Street is my favorite street
[Amit Varma]: in the whole world because all these bookshops including the Blossoms and all that you know
[Amit Varma]: I remember once when I was recording with Ram I told him that when I was leaving after
[Amit Varma]: the recording he said where are you going I said I'm going to the best bookstore in
[Amit Varma]: the world it's Blossoms he said you fool it is not even the best bookstore on Church Street
[Amit Varma]: right and he went bookworm and I'm kind of kidding and exaggerating but in fact this
[Amit Varma]: time when I came he said have you visited the two best bookstores on Church Street but
[Amit Varma]: I want to then ask you about this sort of intellectual culture this respect for the
[Amit Varma]: intellect like you spoke about Herald giving you two pages for a piece on Derrida I can't
[Amit Varma]: imagine a Mumbai newspaper doing that or you know I'm not sure maybe in Calcutta they would
[Amit Varma]: but I don't think that would happen in Delhi either you know so on the one hand it's pretty
[Amit Varma]: obvious that you were kind of lucky to be born into a family of the sort you were born
[Amit Varma]: into with a father like that and therefore all his friends circle and all that but it's
[Amit Varma]: you know Bangalore itself seems to have some of that so tell me a little bit about you
[Amit Varma]: know am I over reading am I overthinking the intellectual culture of this place or you
[Amit Varma]: know has it always been this way for you and does it create a kind of a vicious virtuous
[Amit Varma]: cycle that once you have a culture like this it perpetuates itself younger people get drawn
[Amit Varma]: to it and it grows and in some other place where there might be similarly smart and intelligent
[Amit Varma]: people you don't have an ecosystem to begin with so no one gravitates towards it and that
[Guest]: becomes a vicious circle so thank you Amit that's a very interesting question because
[Guest]: you spoke about Ram Gohar and Rajmohan Gandhi's meeting see the one thing we need to realize
[Guest]: is Bangalore has many such circles and you know there's not one but many and you're obviously
[Guest]: referring to a English kind of an environment but there are many such Kannada environments
[Guest]: and there are a lot of infighting between those things so it makes it far more interesting
[Guest]: so at you know I mean the 70s or the 80s or the 90s or even in the early 2000s you know
[Guest]: I mean if you went to the Senate Hall of the Bangalore University and there used to be
[Guest]: these debates and people used to come prepared to tear somebody down you know I mean I still
[Guest]: remember there was this some presentation on post-colonial theory or some Eliot or something
[Guest]: was happening you know I mean I forget what it was but then Anant Murti was there in the
[Guest]: audience and that used to be common you know I mean people used to come even if they are
[Guest]: not speakers they would come they would sit down and they would raise questions and one
[Guest]: of the speakers said you haven't even read the text why are you asking questions reading
[Guest]: the blurb you know I mean that kind of combative thing you know you were exposed to that even
[Guest]: as a young boy of in my ninth class D.R. Nagaraj actually sort of pulled down I mean of course
[Guest]: pulled on this is on in a seminar hall you know he sort of you know accused another literary
[Guest]: critic who was very close to our family of course I called him uncle and unfairly and
[Guest]: so that was a three-day seminar on Adiga or something you know when I forget what it is
[Guest]: it was at the MES college that much I remember and a lot of small little magazines record
[Guest]: have recorded that episode so so there I mean I mean I was so disturbed I came back and
[Guest]: I read the original essay and I thought that D.R. had completely misrepresented that whole
[Guest]: thing so the next day morning I asked the chair who was presiding over that session
[Guest]: and I said I have to sort of you know speak for two minutes I want to make a submission
[Guest]: on what happened yesterday and this was extremely unfair because he was attacking him because
[Guest]: D.R. those days was a Marxist whatever thing this man was more central and centrist and
[Guest]: whatever so there was this kind of ideological thing happening I didn't even realize all
[Guest]: that you know I mean as I just wanted to defend someone whom I knew so I went promptly read
[Guest]: up and I found that this man had misrepresented so I went up and I just said that this is
[Guest]: what he quoted that is not there in the in the essay this is what he said that's also
[Guest]: wrong and this is the third thing so I just wanted to it was kind of fact-checking of
[Guest]: course the phrase fact-checking wasn't prevalent then you know I was just trying to counter
[Guest]: so in the audience was this great man called his mentor of Girish Karnad who rewrote his
[Guest]: plays initially helped him write his play as well he was from Dharwad he was an English
[Guest]: professor who had taught in Gujarat and he had come back and retired there it is name
[Guest]: is not coming and it'll come back so he was there in the audience and there was there
[Guest]: was another great writer so the moment I came down they just patted my back and they said
[Guest]: taming of the shrew things like that so there were several such things and in Karnataka
[Guest]: if you just go a little beyond Bangalore see Bangalore of course Gandhi Bazaar was one
[Guest]: hub so I mean we don't even consider this side this side this was all later when crosswords
[Guest]: and other big you know I mean bookshops came up that they started holding discussions on
[Guest]: Bangalore for us this doesn't did not exist there was a iron wall between old Bangalore
[Guest]: and Cantonment Bangalore so this was can't so we did not know the Koshy's you know we
[Guest]: used to come to Koshy's because my great my maternal grandfather was a great fan of the
[Guest]: chicken patties there so he used to bring us there but then otherwise you know this
[Guest]: was a different world for us we didn't consider this part of Bangalore so for us it was Baswan
[Guest]: Gudi one big hub then Gandhi Bazaar was a great thing then Jainagar, Maleshwaram so
[Guest]: there were different hubs you know and different kinds of people congregated there and they
[Guest]: fought and they you know had drink at the end of the day and then they just left so
[Guest]: there was this great Kannada critic called Kiram Nagaraj and he was you know I mean he
[Guest]: had he would he was great on Bendre and he was great on all the old Kannada writers like
[Guest]: Kumar Avyasa and all that and we learnt a lot of poetry from him and he would sort of
[Guest]: you know and he enjoyed his drink so he would come a little inebriated and you know create
[Guest]: ruckus in seminar halls and that was a great thing for youngsters like us okay okay Kiram
[Guest]: is going to just screw this person today let's listen or he would you know get drunk and
[Guest]: get very upset with people writing songs for the cassette industry in Kannada let's say
[Guest]: you write a song for I mean it was canonical of course you know I mean now I understand
[Guest]: that this is this is a kind of you know I mean canonical structure there is a hierarchy
[Guest]: which is not correct and should not be looked at that way it is all something that came
[Guest]: later but at that point he would say you write you were born you know in Karnataka where
[Guest]: Narsimh Swami wrote or a Pampa wrote or a Kumar and you write this dirty song I will
[Guest]: tear it apart and that fellow would have taught him for five years or six years in the university
[Guest]: and he would just and everybody would take it in in their stride because he was such
[Guest]: a genius and a marvelous character and those characters you know I mean were allowed today
[Guest]: everything is you cannot have such characters you know I mean today you only the such characters
[Guest]: are there only in the right wing thing where they come and disrupt but here you had liberal
[Guest]: characters who would come and confront you on on your reading of poetry and my reading
[Guest]: of poetry so in fact the one phrase that he taught me he had read Harold Bloom or something
[Guest]: and he told me Sugata it's okay you completely misread a poem no problem it's called the
[Guest]: map of misreading he said I think it was an essay by Harold Bloom or I mean was it Levis
[Guest]: and I forget but then he came he was the first who told me that you don't worry you misread
[Guest]: everything that is also very important and it's that misreading actually leads you to
[Guest]: a different kind of reading so he was a very insightful man and one day when I was at the
[Guest]: Hyderabad Central University there was a knock on my room and I opened and I see Kiran he
[Guest]: has come and he said sir you didn't even tell me he said no I told your father he must have
[Guest]: forgotten to write a letter to you so then I said so why have you come he said no first
[Guest]: buy me coffee I heard that there is a nice coffee thing there let's go so we I bought
[Guest]: him coffee and he said no I have come here looking for a book by Alfred B Lord it's called
[Guest]: the singer of tales this is establishes conclusively it's like he is Alfred B Lord was Milton Parry
[Guest]: and all these were one group of people looking at classical literature and it establishes
[Guest]: that Homer's thing was a part of the oral culture it was not a written classic so I
[Guest]: want to look at it I wanted to read that book that book I heard there's one copy in your
[Guest]: Central University library it's not even available in JNU so can you get me that I'll photocopy
[Guest]: leave by the evening bus my god so he had come there to just pick up that book then
[Guest]: I was so happy and I had heard a new name of an author and I wanted to read it and then
[Guest]: for me it gave me a new leg up right I could go to the classroom and say what are you talking
[Guest]: about Odysseus or Homer or Iliad you know I mean this is all part of the oral culture
[Guest]: it all got stringed up together and then at some point in history it got written it got
[Guest]: published and then you now think it was a written work there is no authorship to that
[Guest]: see Barth had argued about authorship so much about work and text and he was making a distinction
[Guest]: between all of that so here I had this new let thing to go and say that come on you know
[Guest]: I mean what are you talking you know so Kiram he used to be called Kiram so we used to pun
[Guest]: on the word rum because he used to always be consumed by old monk right so he was so
[Guest]: passionate about his poetry and his house was full of you know I mean papers and you
[Guest]: know things thrown around and there was I mean I still remember reading the bathroom
[Guest]: door open seeing him in bathroom door open he's sitting on the commode and reading you
[Guest]: know Pampavartha Deepike which is an introduction to Pampavartha and you know that was the kind
[Guest]: of image that he gave so there were a lot of such characters in Bangalore and Bangalore
[Guest]: University was a great place it allowed it assembled a lot of good people there was K V
[Guest]: Narayan was a great theoretician there was Kiram who was a genius and who never wrote
[Guest]: a word but I mean was in Kannada we call it Thondi, oral you know I mean critic so he
[Guest]: was there there was G. S. Shurudrappa who became the poet laureate and he was the head
[Guest]: of the department he was keeping all these people together there was Siddalingaya who
[Guest]: passed away a Dalit writer who had been brought in and there was Bhargur Ramchandra who was
[Guest]: another stream of Kannada consciousness so there were different kinds of people they
[Guest]: were all in the same department Kannada literature department and they were all looking in different
[Guest]: directions they would come together to fight you know come together for some social whatever
[Guest]: thing and then you know explored these ideas on you and I mean just throw it at you so
[Guest]: that was the environment in Bangalore but if you stepped out of Bangalore there was
[Guest]: Mysore again which is a great hub so you had the great man Kuvimpu sitting there you went
[Guest]: to Bangalore the coast you had Karan sitting there and you went to Dharwad you had the
[Guest]: great Bendre sitting there I don't know if you I mean for a non Kannada reader you
[Guest]: should read the just is those two pages of Dom Morris's introduction on I mean Bendre
[Guest]: where he says and this man this is a journey through Karnataka book that was commissioned
[Guest]: by the government of Karnataka and Devraja was the chief minister in that he says this
[Guest]: man goes there to meet a great poet who's one big non Pete and all that and he speaks
[Guest]: to him only physics and numbers he's there with Leela Naidu his wife interviewing this
[Guest]: great man and he confounds him you know confuses him completely is speaking only numbers asking
[Guest]: for his date of birth and telling giving him some formulation and does not discuss poetry
[Guest]: at the end of the day so there was that person and then there again these kind of fights
[Guest]: were common there were three or four streets were one literary thought another three or
[Guest]: four streets another so there was Shambha Joshi one of the finest minds that Karnataka
[Guest]: and Kannada has seen was there and would not get along with this man and then there was
[Guest]: Kal Burgi who was shot down because he was not he was not seen as in their league but
[Guest]: then he was very important of course and then there was if you came to Hubli and I mean
[Guest]: there were many more such things and then there was Gokhak of course VK Gokhak was a very important
[Guest]: figure who became the who won the Gnanpeet of course but also became the chairman of
[Guest]: the Central Sahitya Akademy and he was he had gone to Cambridge and he was from the
[Guest]: time of Karnad and Karnad studied there if you so that was another intellectual hub but
[Guest]: then that was the Bombay Karnataka region then there was the Hyderabad Karnataka region
[Guest]: which was always you know presented this victimhood that we have been neglected our writing has
[Guest]: been neglected so there was streams of Sufism and Adil Shahi literature and all of that
[Guest]: getting you know mixed up there and it was producing wonderful stuff so that was there
[Guest]: so Karnataka was full of such groups literary groups and intellectual groups and cultural
[Guest]: groups scattered across Karnataka in fact there's a very interesting book in Kannada
[Guest]: called Gedeyara Gumpu by Daba Kulkarni it speaks about the alliance between you know
[Guest]: these relationship between these friends in Darwad and how they sort of built a literary
[Guest]: culture there and of course there was Manohara Granthamala the publisher of AK Ramanujan
[Guest]: and Karnad and Ananthamurthy and they had their Atta there and that was a small little
[Guest]: bookshop it's still there and these people would get that was another group so these
[Guest]: were different lobbies and Chandrasekhar Patil was there great polemicist he had studied
[Guest]: literature at Leeds and come back and become a hardcore Kannada person and wrote great
[Guest]: absurd plays in Kannada took on Lankesh and you know I mean marvelous poetry he wrote
[Guest]: and then he used to when he came from when he shifted from Darwad to Bangalore he used
[Guest]: to say I have come to lobby nagara this is a place of lobby you so you come and lobby
[Guest]: here actually Bangalore has nothing you know that kind of a thing gulabi nagara lobby nagara
[Guest]: you know that kind of a pun used to used I mean garden city right gulabi nagara and things
[Guest]: like that so he was there so there were different groups you know across Karnataka so all these
[Guest]: groups played different kinds of roles and put different kinds of pressures and brought
[Guest]: in different kinds of ideas during the unification of Karnataka itself so they all the all you
[Guest]: can trace all of this back to the unification movement then there was of course Sriranga
[Guest]: Shashi Deshpande's father the giant Kannada writer you know I mean for us Shashi Deshpande
[Guest]: is of course known to the English world for us Sriranga is more important similarly Gauri
[Guest]: is known to the world outside now and for very unfortunate reasons but then it is Lankesh
[Guest]: who is more important for us so I mean there is Adiga who is more important than an Anantamurthy
[Guest]: known to the Western world of course Ramanujan is equally respected that's a very strange
[Guest]: thing because Ramanujan had his firm footing in Kannada he wrote extraordinarily he did
[Guest]: extraordinarily good work in Kannada and then Tamil and then it was a genuine trilingual
[Guest]: English and all of that so there were there were these kinds of very interesting fights
[Guest]: and intellectual disagreements and things that were happening in Karnataka and being
[Guest]: my father's son I was a witness to all of this so this this thing that you mentioned
[Guest]: about Ramguha and Rajmohan Gandhi was a was something that was taking off in Bangalore
[Guest]: which was a literary culture in English so that came to dominate in a different way through
[Guest]: translations and others and now it's a very sad thing that you don't see those arguments
[Guest]: anymore literally I wrote a piece it's part of my first book where I spoke of the death
[Guest]: of Little Magazines and I spoke about how Little Magazines had just died in Kannada
[Guest]: and why it had happened so why it so happened and that you know I mean they had lost team
[Guest]: and then to shut shop and how they were run in fact I was I quote if I remember correctly
[Guest]: I'm please pardon me if I'm wrong I quote from the obituary that was written in the
[Guest]: Boston Globe for Plimpton the person who had started the Paris Review he had passed away
[Guest]: I think around 2004 I mean I don't remember the date again I may be wrong so there the
[Guest]: Little Magazines were described as showcases of you know I mean I forget the phrase also
[Guest]: I mean it was beautifully described where the kind of fragile economic environment in
[Guest]: which they always ran but had great amounts of passion and all of that so that is sort
[Guest]: of gone now even your cultural heroes are different now in Karnataka and Bangalore your
[Guest]: cultural heroes are people who have by default have become people who have or philanthropists
[Guest]: who made money who have sort of you know I mean led IT industries so there are no longer
[Guest]: people you know I mean Akiram cannot be a cultural hero and Adiga is nobody's cultural
[Guest]: hero a Kuvempu I mean a stalwart I think he would have made any language feel great you
[Guest]: know I mean he was I mean a remarkable mind he is I mean lost in some sense but I don't
[Guest]: want to say lost because they'll all be recovered in different ways and I don't want to have
[Guest]: this nostalgic kind of thing I don't want to live in the past and say that was great
[Guest]: and today is bad but this is these are trends and phases that we are seeing where your heroes
[Guest]: are dead you don't have heroes like you had then you know where you said okay this is
[Guest]: this is a character this has to be nurtured is straight out of a novel so he probably
[Guest]: will get into my novel you know you looked at it in a very fascinating you didn't judge
[Guest]: there was a narrative that was always running in your head so you did not stop to judge
[Guest]: so that was something that is something that I miss in Bangalore today today it's more
[Guest]: corporatized even the book event is very corporatized even you know I mean I mean I have seen what
[Guest]: has happened with my own book you know when you have to do it you know I mean it's a very
[Guest]: kind of it's not organic you know people don't come and fight in the middle of the street
[Guest]: and say you have written nonsense you know I would have loved that that doesn't happen
[Guest]: you know and very carefully crafted whatsapp messages that come to you and they say oh
[Guest]: it's good but you know I mean but this you're missing this oh I mean there was no such kind
[Guest]: of holding back because there was people understood each other and people knew that at the end
[Guest]: of the day you're not going to be an enemy of that person you can have a lifelong grudge
[Guest]: and that he said this but then you would always go back to it was a small culture you were
[Guest]: interdependent and it was a feeling of community I think that is the word there was a sense
[Guest]: of community and running a little magazine I write in that piece was like a cottage industry
[Guest]: see my father used to edit he used to proofread but the book post wrap that would go around
[Guest]: it was used to be done by my mother she would put the Gandhi stamp one rupee stamp or whatever
[Guest]: at the edge and then they would both go you know taking this to the post office and mail
[Guest]: it so that is that used to be a bimonthly activity that I was witnessed to as a child
[Guest]: it started in 79 and shut shop in I think 91, 91 is very significant Indian economy
[Guest]: got liberalized opened up at that time so that is that was the kind of and people did
[Guest]: not worry about you know they're losing money or you know I mean oh this is an investment
[Guest]: gone bad or this is an investment that will get you nothing you did it you know you had
[Guest]: a higher purpose culture or this whole linguistic environment I mean you also need a small group
[Guest]: which pushes you to do that you have to be supported in different ways you have to be
[Guest]: told that you know I mean this is good this is great this is something which so I think
[Guest]: everybody lost that at some point that disconnect started happening of course it will all get
[Guest]: connected back in different ways but then that disruption did happen in with huge money
[Guest]: with huge real estate booms in Bangalore and now we know what Kannada professors do in
[Guest]: Kannada Karnataka's universities you know they all do side businesses you know of different
[Guest]: kinds I don't think there is serious kind of work that is happening and at least you
[Guest]: know I mean I mean I'm not really aware but of course there are pockets there are islands
[Guest]: of good work there are there's still a lot of hope and you will reconstruct all of that
[Guest]: in a in a different context at a later point is what I feel I think you're comparing what
[Amit Varma]: is there now to the past you know well I compare it to the present in other places and I'm
[Amit Varma]: like saying wow what a rich culture and even though I can only see one tiny part of it
[Amit Varma]: the English elite kind of part of it so you know before I go back to some of the other
[Amit Varma]: questions I you know have planned a slightly provocative question and this starts with
[Amit Varma]: like a slight anecdote so you know there's there's a guy in Bangalore his name is Shakeel
[Amit Varma]: I've never I haven't met him yet and he's a huge fan he's been a huge fan of the scene
[Amit Varma]: and the unseen been writing to me for years listens to every episode take takes notes
[Amit Varma]: did my writing course so for a while he was insistent that he wants to send me a gift
[Amit Varma]: and I was like that no boss it's okay you don't need to send me a gift and he said that
[Amit Varma]: no no let me send it to you or I'll have to give it to you when you come to Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: he's he's in Bangalore and it's very heavy I don't know how you'll manage so give me
[Amit Varma]: a postal address I will send it to you so finally I relented and said okay let's do
[Amit Varma]: it so then two weeks later this big carton comes right and I open the carton and it's
[Amit Varma]: full of books in Kannada right by one guy I've forgotten the name now so please forgive
[Amit Varma]: me but I think it's poet but it's it's essays and poems and all of that by so and I don't
[Amit Varma]: know Kannada right so I asked him that you know what's the deal so he said no Amit your
[Amit Varma]: work means a lot to me and this other person his work means even more to me and I wanted
[Amit Varma]: to introduce you to his work but there aren't translations and I'm hoping that you will
[Amit Varma]: learn Kannada and read his books now it is a sad reality of our modern times that I may
[Amit Varma]: not do that but having said that while I have you know while we moved house I gave away
[Amit Varma]: a lot of my other books because I was in space I've kept the carton because the sentiment
[Amit Varma]: means something to me right but why I'm bringing it up here is that it shows that it shows
[Amit Varma]: a deep passion for language and literature right and it strikes me as something that
[Amit Varma]: I would expect more from someone in the south of India whether it is Karnataka or Tamil
[Amit Varma]: Nadu or whatever than someone in the north I can't imagine and I don't mean to be harsh
[Amit Varma]: but just in probabilistic terms it is far less likely that someone from a Patna or wherever
[Amit Varma]: is going to sort of an apologies to all Patnaites I think I just got myself into trouble and
[Amit Varma]: clearly from what we just discussed about the deep cultural sort of little neighborhoods
[Amit Varma]: all over Karnataka and all of that there is this engagement with culture with language
[Amit Varma]: with the arts in South India that is not so much there among the Amits as it were as Twitter
[Amit Varma]: people would say because Amit has become a sort of a shorthand for North Indian buffoons
[Amit Varma]: and sadly I have to bear that name so this is therefore a provocative question it just
[Amit Varma]: struck me we have many more interesting things to talk about but I just wonder that don't
[Amit Varma]: people like you sometimes look at what is happening in the rest of the country and you're
[Amit Varma]: like why the hell have we been buffeted together with these you know uncouth morons you know
[Amit Varma]: and it's incredible you know up there they have no idea of South India they think that
[Amit Varma]: you know Hindi should be natural language and we have tolerated you and whatever and
[Amit Varma]: all of that shit and they have that kind of attitude right and and they are of course
[Amit Varma]: you know multiplying like rabbits while South India is chilling listening to good music
[Amit Varma]: watching good plays and which is not to say there aren't outliers in the north as well
[Amit Varma]: but if I was in the south I would be like to hell with this shit and a question that
[Amit Varma]: I've asked my guests in recent episodes also is that we often take the status quo for granted
[Amit Varma]: in such a way that it seems like it is solidified it is granite and to me one of those concepts
[Amit Varma]: is nation states lines on a map right where you look at the current nation state a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it is happenstance right to me like a Delhi has much more in common with Lahore in a good
[Amit Varma]: way than it does with Chennai for example you know a few years later we'll have the
[Amit Varma]: delimitation problem coming up which can also be sort of something that and I can totally
[Amit Varma]: and friends of mine joke about this that we should have the Republic of South India and
[Amit Varma]: blah blah blah so yeah so it's just a it's not even a question per se it's just a provocative
[Amit Varma]: thought but I wonder if you feel this way sometimes and that you know I mean I come
[Amit Varma]: to Bangalore it feels like a different country in a sense I mean it's the same country and
[Amit Varma]: I love the whole country but you know what are your thoughts it's very interesting that
[Guest]: you say this but then I mean I've also been fairly acquainted with say through my father
[Guest]: as well as later to with the kind of Lucknowi kind of literary environment or I we spoke
[Guest]: about the Bengali literary environment you know people are very very passionate my father
[Guest]: had great linkages with writers in Bengal and Abhinita Shendev you know I mean there's
[Guest]: he there's a joint kind of travelogue that he writes with us I mean he's his part of
[Guest]: the travel he's a character in that travelogue where they go to meet this lady and this great
[Guest]: grand lady of Bengal and they don't know what to call her they come out of this thing and
[Guest]: they call her lady Kiram the Kiram that I was referring to because she's so passionate
[Guest]: about poetry and she's spoken to them so much about that so for me you know I mean I don't
[Guest]: know if it is a problem with me but I was shown only these things the good things my
[Guest]: father had a good relationship with Bisham Sahani so we still have a lot of letters exchanged
[Guest]: between the two of them and I have a copy of Thomas which is signed for him and then
[Guest]: he would so meticulously inquire after my grandmother's health and stuff like that you
[Guest]: know I mean so so there was always these Kartar Singh Duggal another name so Bengal Lucknowi
[Guest]: and even in Delhi if you mentioned the partition thing and then in Delhi I had we had rather
[Guest]: the family had a Sharda Prasad who mentored me you know I mean and Sharda Prasad was such
[Guest]: a cultured man who would host Malik Arjun Mansoor and Shivram Karanth and all these
[Guest]: people who were dissenting against Indira Gandhi's emergency at his house you know
[Guest]: and he was still part of the PMO so it was that contradiction he never thought that you
[Guest]: know I mean he was compromised you know anything like that because Karanth used to stay with
[Guest]: this man and Karanth he has translated Karanth's book you know I mean the autobiography and
[Guest]: has a couple of novels and all of that and Sharda Prasad is extremely good and so we
[Guest]: were always painted this I don't know if my father painted these romantic pictures for
[Guest]: us so there was this problem until and unless I started writing seriously on say federalism
[Guest]: or finance commissions and GST and looking at the federal issues between the south and
[Guest]: the center and how the whole centralization problem operates and that's I've been writing
[Guest]: a lot about it in my columns in the times these days on that so I now feel that you
[Guest]: know I mean feel more strongly that we are a union of states and there's less common
[Guest]: but even having said that and I think I should also sort of add this caveat which is see
[Guest]: you had a Andhra Pradesh right a united Andhra Pradesh and it was the one of the first linguistic
[Guest]: states that was created after Poteshwar Ramlu started protesting and he has he dies and
[Guest]: all that but look at what happened with Andhra Pradesh there was a cultural kind of breakage
[Guest]: so the Telangana culture was different and the Andhra culture was different and when
[Guest]: we were growing up you know when there was this pride injected about Kannada because
[Guest]: Kannada had got so many Gnanpeeths so we thought that Telugu was a lesser thing or a Tamil
[Guest]: was a lesser thing but that was not the case but then you know I mean you always sort of
[Guest]: you were allowed to go on a certain highway or a certain path and you only saw these kind
[Guest]: of markers so I may not be a fair judge of you know what what happens in a Patna thing
[Guest]: or other places because I was not exposed to that but my political writing later took
[Guest]: me to you know cover elections and all that then I saw that these places were you know
[Guest]: what's wrong with these places why aren't they developed if you go to Hassan I write
[Guest]: about it in 2009 much much before I even dreamt of writing a book on Deve Gowda that it's
[Guest]: an island of some kind of a great development because Deve Gowda had everything going in
[Guest]: that thing you know every scheme every central scheme the highways the roads you know you
[Guest]: know I mean fantastic development in that place but if you go to say a Rai Bareilly
[Guest]: or an Amethi you know you you feel like crying as to what is it that these people have done
[Guest]: why is it that they have been showered with so much of affection by these people continuously
[Guest]: you go to a filibit where Nehru used to contest his election you know everything looks completely
[Guest]: dilapidated and dismantled and nothing seems to be working you know I mean but in Karnataka
[Guest]: that was when I started making that it was not cultural see culturally you still got
[Guest]: you you you sort of entered into something through a text or through a person or through
[Guest]: a song right so Urdu for example I was so fascinated by Urdu at some point I wanted
[Guest]: to learn to write and read Urdu but it never happened but then all my Urdu came through
[Guest]: the Hindi films so this 60s and the 70s and the great lyricists and I was obsessed with
[Guest]: the Hindi film music and now I have Mr. Chiranjeev Singh you know whom I call up the great bureaucrat
[Guest]: who served the state a Punjabi extremely cultured India's ambassador to UNESCO at one point
[Guest]: and I just call him up and I ask him sir why don't you explain this to me he can I ask
[Guest]: him about Bengali poetry ask him what Urdu poetry I ask him about Punjabi poetry he himself
[Guest]: writes Punjabi poetry and he's so kind to explain all of that to me so I mean these
[Guest]: things were happening so you you enter through text and there is this politics which you
[Guest]: enter through experience and you're you know you're sort of seeing it there happen so these
[Guest]: two were different worlds for me when I was shocked when I started writing for outlook
[Guest]: say on on these states and all that and but this this cultural thing never came up to
[Guest]: me because I thought that that is still relevant that is still sort of their subsumed subterranean
[Guest]: and it does not manifest itself in popular culture the way we need to but but we should
[Guest]: also recognize that Hindi films probably sort of finished off all of this right because
[Guest]: you know it was such a dominant thing in the north that it finished everything but in Canada
[Guest]: or Telugu or Tamil I think there was still a bit of literary export into into films one
[Guest]: of the great literary influences my father had was his uncle who was a bank manager and
[Guest]: he was a great literary influence because he was the first reader of one of Karnataka's
[Guest]: great Canada's great novelists Tarasu Tarasu Barao and Tarasu Barao wrote historical novels
[Guest]: size which I mean huge novels and many of those were made into movies for Rajkumar right
[Guest]: so so there was a lot of this that we were exposed to and not exposed to the other side
[Guest]: but I became a very serious political writer only after I think went to Hindustan times
[Guest]: I because I had it was by force that I had to look at different kind of material and
[Guest]: even there you know you when I when I went to Jaipur to be an editor I used to go and
[Guest]: create my own little you know I mean comfort zone of culture and literature with the writers
[Guest]: there and with oral historians and and think that that is there that is the soul of that
[Guest]: place and this is there of course there is Gaylord there is Bhairav Singh Shekawat whom
[Guest]: you have to deal with for your pet ka sawal hai, theek hai likh lenge isme kya but then
[Guest]: you all also bought the experience you also took the experience of your literary and cultural
[Guest]: thing there and started looking at them as characters and so Bhairav Singh Shekawat was
[Guest]: to used to be very fond of me used to be very nice to me in fact you know I mean even before
[Guest]: he became the vice president of India used to lock up the latch up the door and used
[Guest]: to give me a single small peg of black label or whatever whiskey I mean I've had whiskey
[Guest]: with Bhairav Singh Shekawat and the age difference must have been you know me say 50-60 years
[Guest]: you know you don't know so he was very very great and he liked me because I came from
[Guest]: again very interesting he liked me because I came from Karnataka he liked me because
[Guest]: I was somewhat related to Devraj Aras and Devraj Aras whom he saw as a great administrator
[Guest]: statesman and all that and and a person who had revolutionized you know political thinking
[Guest]: and all of that so so there were lots of these connections so then he was nice and then you
[Guest]: you sort of started looking at these people for what they were but then there was other
[Guest]: there was politics of course so that made my copy interesting so I used to sort of bring
[Guest]: in this little insight about the man who newspapers would be rubbishing as you know I mean oh
[Guest]: he's sold out or whatever this is but then there was this little thing about the man
[Guest]: which would sort of come into my copy which would sort of give my copy a bit of a extra
[Guest]: sparkle which made my copies more humane and then I used to sort of look at them not to
[Guest]: judge them I used to look at them to sort of understand them and that's something that
[Guest]: I got from my very early literary training and my father was someone like that who would
[Guest]: listen even to this day he's mythologized you know in Kannada memoirs and a lot of people
[Guest]: have written about how they used to come sit in front of him talk for hours he would not
[Guest]: just speak anything and then they would just leave that's it and they would feel happy
[Guest]: after that so that was the kind of person my father was I am not so reticent as him
[Guest]: you know I'm I was my mother used to call me you know punning or the word Churchill
[Guest]: Churchill in church in Kannada is debating so she would say you're a Churchill so you
[Guest]: always you know you know get into an argument about something or the other so but my father
[Guest]: was not like that but that but that that you quietly absorbed that and that came into my
[Guest]: political writing also which did not make me did not sort of make me feel that I was
[Guest]: doing something else completely divorced from my cultural reading or literary reading or
[Guest]: whatever because when I I took all of that into my political thing so when I sat with
[Guest]: these big people and I still remember Shekhar was telling me he came back from Delhi that
[Guest]: evening and then he telephoned he said Bhaisahab kya kar rahe hain a jaaye hain you know and
[Guest]: then I went and had good food and he spoke about his son-in-law and some unhappiness
[Guest]: and all that in the family and then he said you know what I did today I went and had lunch
[Guest]: with Advani I said why did you do that he said no I want to sort of make Vajpayee very
[Guest]: alert about it you know Vajpayee is ignoring me so I just want want him to know that I've
[Guest]: had lunch with Advani and then I said were you successful he said ha by the time I was
[Guest]: leaving I got a call so Vajpayee called me he said what are you doing what were you doing
[Guest]: there why are you doing this to me come let's have a chat so then they had broached the
[Guest]: issue of becoming he becoming the vice-president so so I mean he used to he used to be such
[Guest]: a he used to just disarm you by sharing things which you thought was was you know I mean
[Guest]: high intrigue or whatever he said this is human see he would he would make if Vajpayee
[Guest]: was human Advani was human and Shekhawat was human and then they would sort of you know
[Guest]: that those jealousies or those kind of dynamics between them he would sort of share it in
[Guest]: a very interesting fashion and then he said I just had to go to Advani's house for lunch
[Guest]: to sort of get the antenna up there and Vajpayee's house and Vajpayee came to know of it obviously
[Guest]: so he called me and then of course we broached this whole thing so I may be the vice-president
[Guest]: of India so this was how he revealed to me that he would he may be the vice-president
[Guest]: of India I was in Jaipur at that time so so political writing too for me was an extension
[Guest]: of my cultural understanding of things I mean it was a it was a it was very important for
[Guest]: me not to look at it as data so that is the reason why I keep sort of saying that you
[Guest]: know people who really don't want to sort of speak about politics hide behind data because
[Guest]: good political writing for me is of course data is there it's very very important it's
[Guest]: it's extremely important to read it very carefully but then it's both a mix of emotion and reason
[Guest]: because politics is full of emotion it is not reason alone you cannot sort of say why
[Guest]: Devya Gowda did this or did not do this or why he goes to his temple so often I mean
[Guest]: why did you know in Shekhawat sort of do this so I mean this is something that I have not
[Guest]: been able to sort of effectively pass on to say the generation after me to tell them that
[Guest]: see don't your graphs and your data is all very important but that does not say much
[Guest]: about the person but if you want to write about the person you have to spend time with
[Guest]: him look at him a little with critical sympathy is a phrase that my other guru the great guru
[Guest]: who would change me after I went to England was Jeremy Seabrook was the one who used it
[Guest]: first and he has used it for my book as well which makes me very proud so so critical sympathy
[Guest]: you know you can you can be critical you know because all these seminars that and the conferences
[Guest]: that I used to go where people used to you know I mean tear each other apart and then
[Guest]: be having a whiskey at the end of the day or a rum at the end of the day it was all
[Guest]: natural to me I mean for me it did not sort of make me look at this this thing as a black
[Guest]: and white thing or a confrontationalist thing yes it's right as part of a culture it is
[Guest]: a culture so when politicians you know I mean just shoot away in the on the floor of the
[Guest]: house you know call names and then they're having a nice chat it does not surprise me
[Guest]: because you know I mean it's I've seen that happen elsewhere in a different setting so
[Guest]: I mean they're human beings you know I mean primarily I think we don't look at our politicians
[Guest]: as human beings we seem to look at them as power you know filled with power some instruments
[Guest]: of power which which they are not actually they are very humane they can be very humane
[Guest]: they can be very cruel and that cruelty is also part of you know I mean you'll observe
[Guest]: that cruelty much more only if you are willing to go beyond your data and sort of look at
[Guest]: them interestingly so so for me it is I mean the silos that you spoke about does not really
[Guest]: operate in in those ways it's it's a one continuous thing for me I take this with me there so
[Guest]: therefore I see that there and then when I don't see that there I try to reason it out
[Guest]: in a completely different way so so but but this whole Republic thing of South as a that
[Guest]: South should succeed kind of a thing I don't want to create a controversy but but you know
[Guest]: I mean India is a union of states what Rahul Gandhi said was correct in the parliament
[Guest]: I wrote a column on that yeah you've you mean trying to create you know manufacture a nation
[Guest]: with so much of diversity and so much of you know I mean dissonance and whatever it's it's
[Guest]: it's a very false idea right you cannot you cannot you know in any it's inconceivable
[Guest]: to sort of think that everything is flat you know to say one nation to say one you know
[Guest]: religion one language it's a it's it's utmost stupidity to sort of speak of that and if
[Guest]: somebody is trying to do that they're actually should be you know I mean they're they're
[Guest]: actually trying to break up this nation you know they are accusing others of breaking
[Guest]: up this nation actually the ones who speak of oneness are the ones who are to be charged
[Guest]: with the the severest of sedition you know laws because they are the ones who are actually
[Guest]: trying to break this whole thing up because if you don't allow this nation to exist the
[Guest]: way it has been knit now loosely for whatever you know in some destiny of this nation you
[Guest]: know when has put it together in this form if you want to retain it if you're serious
[Guest]: about retaining this this whole nation in this form and it's in the same contours that
[Guest]: it is in now I don't think you can impose I mean anything on this nation forget about
[Guest]: doing it in the south you can't do it even in the Kashmir you can't do it in Bengal you
[Guest]: can't do it you've seen reaction to the whole thing now this whole federal argument is coming
[Guest]: back I'm very happy it's coming back because in 2018 I was a loner when I used to speak
[Guest]: about it even Stalin was not back in power Stalin was not interested to listen to these
[Guest]: arguments so federalism argument is coming back for me cultural federalism is more important
[Guest]: than political federalism I think they have to move a step further so the Tamils try to
[Guest]: make the Dravidian thing their cause but you know I mean if they are to argue for the Dravidian
[Guest]: cause they have to actually be more inclusive they have to look at Andhra, Telangana, Karnataka,
[Guest]: Kerala far more inclusively so it the Tamil exclusive idea is also not going to serve
[Guest]: them well which they don't seem to realize at this point of time because you know the
[Guest]: Dravidian thing has been completely captured I mean this is seen as a kind of their idea
[Guest]: their thing their civil if it's a civilizational thing it can't be just yours so if you are
[Guest]: using that to confront the north if you are using your the alternate epics that you have
[Guest]: to confront the north and try to say that we are a different country I mean there are
[Guest]: fascinating I don't know Amit if you have had this chance to see fascinating debates
[Guest]: in Rajya Sabha in the 60s when Anna Durai was a Rajya Sabha member brilliant speeches
[Guest]: on this whole thing and you could speak about you know breaking away from India until 65
[Guest]: I think this whole idea was different so brilliant speeches you know and he makes a cultural
[Guest]: argument and even if you look at forget Rajya Sabha even if you look at the assembly Karnataka
[Guest]: unification debates it's fascinating A.H. Ram his name was Ramchandra Rao I think Devagoda's
[Guest]: mentor in Hassan he was the education minister he has a three-hour speech where he speaks
[Guest]: about cultural differences and why Mysore should not integrate with the rest of Kannada
[Guest]: speak is this on YouTube or something no it's you know just from the 50s yeah so it's it
[Guest]: can't be there it's there is a it's an official record of the Karnataka legislature assembly
[Guest]: it was those days it used to be called the Mysore legislature assembly you had you renamed
[Guest]: only in 73 so it became Karnataka in 73 so you those debates are fascinating and you
[Guest]: are not on you don't want there was a huge resistance to Mysore integrating with rest
[Guest]: of Karnataka because they were impoverished area they were this would it would bring down
[Guest]: the GDP of Mysore right so they didn't want that and as a result culturally Mysore dominated
[Guest]: the rest of Karnataka culturally political power has shifted but culturally because the
[Guest]: standard dialect that you use in Kannada today is a dialect that was spoken in Mysore so
[Guest]: that became the standard thing that became your textbook language so the others who sacrificed
[Guest]: because they were all fringes of other linguistic states so they were desperate more than the
[Guest]: Mysoreans to become part of Karnataka so they gave up their dual identities they surrendered
[Guest]: their Marathi there's there they surrendered their Urdu they're surrendered their Dakhani
[Guest]: and Telugu Tamil everything and they became part of Karnataka and wanted to be identified
[Guest]: with a Kannada state and now you see the kind of you know I mean rumblings that there are
[Guest]: that people are not at all happy this this whole thing is this after the Telangana's
[Guest]: formation I think it has become even more sharper where people say development is one
[Guest]: part not giving enough funds for development is one part but the cultural differences the
[Guest]: you know the kind of characters in Kannada movies you if you I mean since you don't see
[Guest]: Kannada movies you may not realize this all the guys who are cooks who play the role of
[Guest]: characters of cooks or whatever they're all from coastal Karnataka so they're not given
[Guest]: the lead role then the jesters and the comedians and all of them speak a certain kind of Hyderabad
[Guest]: sorry Darwad Hubli Darwad kind of Kannada which is very you know I mean it's not very
[Guest]: smooth it's like the East Godavari Telugu and the Telangana Telugu it's very rough edges
[Guest]: are more in the Telangana thing they have rough edges they come across as very very
[Guest]: you know I mean it sounds very harsh the language sounds very harsh so but they're not people
[Guest]: like that they're see it's their expression is like that they've spoken like that for
[Guest]: centuries but you know I mean the Mysoreans look at it take a take offense to that kind
[Guest]: of a usage in fact I was on a train recently to Goa and I was looking at I mean because
[Guest]: I I mean I as there was a family which was sitting and they were using the word Gussa
[Guest]: so beautifully in Kannada you know in their Kannada sentence so she that lady who was
[Guest]: you know I mean sitting family and this little kid and she was telling me how this girl gets
[Guest]: Gussa and she was putting it in Kannada you know I mean and then repeatedly I didn't want
[Guest]: to make her conscious tell me how it sounded I mean even if I don't understand this girl
[Guest]: is very angry see I mean you see and I instantly could understand that they had come from the
[Guest]: Hyderabad Karnataka region and they had settled in Bangalore and they were going to go for
[Guest]: a trip and similarly if you go towards Kolar and KGF and all that the Telugu you know Telugu
[Guest]: is another language but that you know I was very familiar because my father was very familiar
[Guest]: with Telugu and he studied in Chikbalapur because his aunt was widowed and my grandfather
[Guest]: had a I mean transferable job so they kept the children in one place so that they could
[Guest]: go and study there and all that so he had he says Telugu was extremely good he could
[Guest]: read and write Telugu so if you go to those regions you go to Kolar, Chikbalapur, Chikbalapur
[Guest]: is now a separate district but was part of undivided Kolar district so if you go there
[Guest]: Telugu is a street language if you go to Mangalore you have Tulu, you have Biari, you have Konkani
[Guest]: and then you have Kannada so I mean none of the Karnataka see Karnataka is not a state
[Guest]: which wears its chauvinism on its sleeves like a Tamil or a Malayali whatever thing
[Guest]: happens not so much Malayalam but they don't because you know when there are only three
[Guest]: or four hardcore Kannada districts rest of them are all bilingual or trilingual areas
[Guest]: the street market language is different from your kitchen language the language that you
[Guest]: use in your kitchen to converse with your family is your mother tongue or whatever and
[Guest]: then you come to the street and you speak say Tulu if you're in Mangalore and then if
[Guest]: you're if you're you know into trade or whatever you use Biari because it's the Muslim traders
[Guest]: who use Biari and then there is the schools and other places set up by Christian missionaries
[Guest]: where Konkani is very dominant there is a there's a whole debate as to how Konkani should
[Guest]: be written in which script because that language doesn't have a script and my wife is a Konkani
[Guest]: so that is a fascinating thing so Karnataka is again if you look at forget as we spoke
[Guest]: the rest of India and the diversity that exists even in the small little state which is the
[Guest]: size of a big European country of course there is so much of division and so when I go to
[Guest]: Europe and when friends make arguments about Catalonian or Basque or Breton or what I understand
[Guest]: it completely well and I don't judge them for that and they say what do these fellows
[Guest]: do you know I mean they don't know anything Basque has this thing this expression is so
[Guest]: beautiful in the Basque language so that's why that's how I became very very close to
[Guest]: my friends in Ireland when I used to work with the Irish times in Dublin for a very
[Guest]: short period so because there was a revival happening of the Irish language and I went
[Guest]: and made a very controversial statement in a newspaper article that I wrote for the Irish
[Guest]: times and I said all these Yeats and Beckett and Joyce all of you all of them you call
[Guest]: Irish writers but for us they're English writers because it came through the colonial curriculum
[Guest]: and these people whom you celebrate as Irish writers had turned their backs to the Gaelic
[Guest]: language or the Celtic culture so why do you celebrate them you know that kind of a very
[Guest]: provocative piece which was hugely appreciated because it was the literary editor of Irish
[Guest]: times at that time wonderful lady called Caroline Walsh she sort of drowned herself very sadly
[Guest]: a few years ago but she was so appreciative of it and I only later realized she was the
[Guest]: daughter of the great Mary Levin the short story writer of Ireland and she had dabbled
[Guest]: with those issues and she had was very familiar and when this argument was being made I said
[Guest]: she said you just write and I was a I was just 26 27 I think and then they got my photograph
[Guest]: my my mug photo for an article first appeared in a European newspaper not in any of the
[Guest]: Indian newspapers and they were so happy and then they called me for a radio debate like
[Guest]: others and then I just explained my ideas and they were so surprised that I know so
[Guest]: much of English literature without realizing that we had we were only exposed to Shakespeare
[Guest]: and Beckett and Yeats and Joyce all of that so so so I mean I was a small hit you know
[Guest]: I mean when I was there with them so Caroline Walsh and they were so welcoming they took
[Guest]: you home and they she was so happy with that argument she took me home and her husband
[Guest]: was a novelist so she said he's made this argument I'm getting him to write and then
[Guest]: she took then there was another person called Paddy Woodworth who was in the foreign desk
[Guest]: and he was very familiar with the Basque thing you know when he was very so he was very interested
[Guest]: in this argument and then they got me to write a piece on Rajkumar had been kidnapped by
[Guest]: Virappan here and that was a completely they didn't know how to understand the whole thing
[Guest]: they said please explain to a European audience as to why a film star is being kidnapped in
[Guest]: the first place and why is why is it such a big issue and why is the state shut down
[Guest]: because a film star has been kidnapped and why is the state government negotiating why
[Guest]: are the state agencies getting involved in this whole thing then I had to tell them that
[Guest]: this person called Rajkumar is not an actor he's a cultural icon and he was such a powerful
[Guest]: guy that in 1954 I think he's made his debut in Kannada and then his the reunification
[Guest]: movement was happening at the same time and you know how they identified the outer reaches
[Guest]: of Karnataka wherever his films ran were considered Karnataka see it's great for an actor I mean
[Guest]: to get such so so so involved with the you know map map of the state or you know contours
[Guest]: of the state when it was just accidental but then it was a great thing to happen so I'm
[Guest]: this Kannada that he spoke was the was the standard Kannada they said he speaks Kannada
[Guest]: the best or one should speak Kannada like him so he was not very educated in fact he's
[Guest]: all his speeches he says why are you giving me this doctoral degree I am a I am not very
[Guest]: educated all that but then to explain all this to a Western audience was a fantastic
[Guest]: experience for me and then that is when I started thinking about all this also so diversity
[Guest]: you go to Europe you go to come to South you look at Karnataka I look at India it's completely
[Guest]: foolish and completely idiotic and it's not a sustainable project to speak of this one
[Guest]: nation one one religion one language and all that and and of course I mean I'll speak to
[Guest]: you later about how nationalisms and sub-nationalisms themselves have undergone a transformatory
[Amit Varma]: kind of a thing so I'll sort of allow you to ask next question no there's so much to
[Amit Varma]: double down and and this whole picture you've painted of our diversity multilingual diversity
[Amit Varma]: is so beautiful and and the one part I'm going to double down on before I move on is that
[Amit Varma]: I agreed so much when you spoke about what you would call anti-national in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you know it's a cliche on my show to talk about how we contain multitudes and you've
[Amit Varma]: kind of eloquently described so many of the multitudes even within a state all the different
[Amit Varma]: languages and all and it is absolutely anti-national to then impose upon that this monolithic vision
[Amit Varma]: that this is nationalism only this one thing and try to sub I mean in a sense it's it's
[Amit Varma]: a murder of cultures when you try to do that it's it's just a crime on humanity so I couldn't
[Amit Varma]: agree more on that now I have a ton of questions for you a ton of things to talk about rather
[Amit Varma]: let's take a quick commercial break and then we'll come back and do that have you always
[Amit Varma]: wanted to be a writer but never quite gotten down to it well I'd love to help you since
[Amit Varma]: April 2020 I've taught 20 cohorts of my online course the art of clear writing an online
[Amit Varma]: community has now sprung up of all my past students we have workshops a newsletter to
[Amit Varma]: showcase the work of students and vibrant community interaction in the course itself
[Amit Varma]: through four webinars spread over four weekends I share all I know about the craft and practice
[Amit Varma]: of clear writing there are many exercises much interaction a lovely and lively community
[Amit Varma]: at the end of it the course cost rupees 10,000 plus GST or about 150 dollars and is a monthly
[Amit Varma]: thing so if you're interested head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing
[Amit Varma]: that's indiancut.com slash clear writing being a good writer doesn't require god-given talent
[Amit Varma]: just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your
[Amit Varma]: skills I can help you. Welcome back to the scene in the unseen I'm chatting with Sugata
[Amit Varma]: Srinivasa Raju about his rich life as it turns out I mean I thought we might talk about his
[Amit Varma]: book with Deve Gowda and maybe we'll get to it at some point and maybe we won't because
[Amit Varma]: I'm thoroughly enjoying this conversation and this trip you're taking me you know through
[Amit Varma]: your life and through your times and all of that my next question actually comes out of
[Amit Varma]: something two of the guests I've recorded with earlier this week I've mentioned and
[Amit Varma]: one Ram Guha was talking about this classic essay he wrote the death of the bilingual
[Amit Varma]: intellectual where he lamented that once upon a time they used to be bilingual intellectuals
[Amit Varma]: and now they're not and it's a loss and Akar Patel when I mentioned to him that I'd be
[Amit Varma]: chatting with you he said oh Sugata is a true bilingual person right and and that's actually
[Amit Varma]: something that I envy and feel as a loss in the sense that I am multilingual in the sense
[Amit Varma]: I can speak and understand multiple Indian languages but there is only one language really
[Amit Varma]: in which I consume art and in which I can express myself which of course is English
[Amit Varma]: which I'll consider an Indian language but it is just one language and I feel that loss
[Amit Varma]: more and more when I speak to people like you or Mrinal Pandey or Sarah Rai or others
[Amit Varma]: who've been on the show and they talk about and there's so much richness all around me
[Amit Varma]: which I don't have a means to experience and and when you were talking about sort of growing
[Amit Varma]: up and being bilingual and translating from English to Kannada and trying to translate
[Amit Varma]: the other way and so on and so forth one of the things that struck me and I did an episode
[Amit Varma]: on translation with Arunabh Sinha and I couldn't agree more and he was of the same view that
[Amit Varma]: translation in a sense is impossible every language is so fundamentally different that
[Amit Varma]: you know it's almost an act of creation to translate something because you try to capture
[Amit Varma]: the essence and then you try to you know recreate that as it were but it also strikes me that
[Amit Varma]: if you are that fluent in multiple languages you are living multiple lives you have multiple
[Amit Varma]: brains you know in the because languages are so different and they are gateways to such
[Amit Varma]: different worlds that you are no longer one person you are as many people as the languages
[Amit Varma]: you are and I'm it's a little simplistic you are exposed to multiple milieus within each
[Amit Varma]: language perhaps as well but you know and and therefore it seems that that sort of you
[Amit Varma]: know richness and diversity is just incredible so what are your sort of thoughts on this?
[Guest]: Amit, yeah I mean it's the death of the I remember that essay by Ram Guha I think it
[Guest]: was in the EPW if I'm right I don't know if I wrote to him after that essay after reading
[Guest]: that essay and around that time I delivered the H.Y. Shadaprasad memorial lecture this
[Guest]: was I think 2012 of April for his birthday and it was titled bilingualism as a cultural
[Guest]: idea so it was a long lecture and I think I raised a few questions about that essay
[Guest]: in my lecture I of course forget what what it was I don't I don't remember the specifics
[Guest]: of it but I in I mean in general I agree with what both with what Ram Guha is saying speaking
[Guest]: about the death of a bilingual and there are various reasons for that you know I mean one
[Guest]: of the reasons that I have actually been discussing in my books I mean my earlier books on language
[Guest]: not the Dev Ekavatar book is that see the sub-nationalist thing model earlier that is
[Guest]: I would you know if one would roughly put a kind of ballpark decades say from the 30s
[Guest]: when the consciousness started I mean 30s 40s 50s up to the 60s even early I mean 70s
[Guest]: it started getting distorted a little so those precious four of four decades you imagined
[Guest]: a Kannada nation as an inclusive nation so if you look at the early proponents of the
[Guest]: Kannada nation like B. M. Shrikantaiah or people of his generation they are even you
[Guest]: know I mean someone who is referred to as the father of the whole idea and Alur Venkat
[Guest]: Rao and others but they were all extremely inclusive in their imaginations you know me
[Guest]: and B. M. Shrikantaiah in fact translates a bunch of hymns and songs and poems from
[Guest]: English into Kannada and calls it English Geethegalu and those English Geethegalu were
[Guest]: never English Geethegalu for a Kannada audience it became Kannada songs nobody remembers in
[Guest]: fact that they were actually originally written in another language and they were translated
[Guest]: into Kannada for example there is a very popular prayer in Kannada which nobody remembers and
[Guest]: I don't want to remind them that it was written by a pastor in I think it's a Welsh pastor
[Guest]: whatever I mean it's a song it's a poem it's a prayer which is so popular in Kannada that
[Guest]: nobody remembered that it was a translated thing so that is the it speaks about the quality
[Guest]: of the translation but it also speaks about the reception of a culture so and it is completely
[Guest]: Kannadized you know it's not a verbatim kind of a translation so it's Lead Kindly Light
[Guest]: is the poem so it's become Karunalu Baa Belakku it's actually more beautiful in Kannada I
[Guest]: mean I've been listening to a different versions of Lead Kindly Light being performed in orchestras
[Guest]: and others in the west but then this is so beautiful and it's composed in Kannada so
[Guest]: beautifully it's it's you have it in your memory can you Karunalu Baa Belakku Musukidhi
[Guest]: Muppinali Kai Hidedu Nadesem Manu that is the that's how it sounds so lovely so beautiful
[Guest]: it's lyrical it's it's it's amazing and it makes you feel like you are a middle class
[Guest]: person making a prayer in the morning and you are sort of I mean there's a reason why
[Guest]: I say middle class because it's it's literary and all that because there is another thing
[Guest]: which where it is it wouldn't be a prayer for another community so so you are making
[Guest]: this prayer you're sort of inviting light to sort of lead you and there are these tough
[Guest]: times and all that and it became one part of movies it became part of a singing culture
[Guest]: became part of the light music what is called as quote-unquote light music in Kannada what
[Guest]: is as opposite to the classical music is called light music Bhava Geethe Bhava is emotion
[Guest]: I think it in Hindi it would be called Sugam Sangeet Sugam Sangeet yeah it's Kannada also
[Guest]: it's called Sugam Sangeet but then Bhava Geethe is a more popular and more appropriate way
[Guest]: of sort of looking at that so all of these became great Bhava Geethe in Kannada so that
[Guest]: was an inclusive kind of imagination of Kannada which you see in the translation of Greek
[Guest]: plays coming into Kannada so they were borrowing heavily you know they were constructing a
[Guest]: kind of modern literature because there was nothing modern in Kannada everything was you
[Guest]: know I mean 15th century 1670s I mean that was all you know closed court kind of literature
[Guest]: so you had to create this and you had someone like Masti Venkatesh Iyengar he was a you
[Guest]: know I mean Mysore service officer of those days and he creates a writer's fund to publish
[Guest]: young writer something that my father did and in a different generation in a different
[Guest]: time and I he was inspired by all these people he creates a fund because he is he has this
[Guest]: big fat salary and he's working for the Mysore administrative service and he's a big commissioner
[Guest]: of this and that and he keeps this money aside from his salary and publishes you will not
[Guest]: believe the first work of K. V. Puttappa who became the great mighty Kuvempu later Kuvempu
[Guest]: is now not just a literary figure in Kannada he's like Rajkumar a cultural figure in Kannada
[Guest]: so he publishes Kogile his first anthology of poems he would be staying in the Ramakrishna
[Guest]: mission hostel in Mysore so he goes finds him and you know publishes these poems he
[Guest]: publishes the first work of he gives money to Bendre to publish his poetry anthology
[Guest]: he gives money to Shivram Karanth to publish his anthology so there is this activity happening
[Guest]: and look at all those people Shivram Karanth the kind of work that he wrote was liberal
[Guest]: humanism you know I mean the kind of thing that he brought into his literature you know
[Guest]: I mean speaking about God or philosophy or anything for that matter or human relate all
[Guest]: of it had a great enlightenment influence right so it was it was an enlightenment kind
[Guest]: of a thing renaissance kind of a thing that was happening in Kannada and these people
[Guest]: were constructing from the broadest possible kind of platforms and broadest possible influences
[Guest]: and they were bringing it all into Kannada and they were all of them I mean Atis Kuvempu
[Guest]: and these people desired to be English writers and they were sort of you know course corrected
[Guest]: and made Kannada writers and so they were not opposing this or that and saying oh this
[Guest]: is not mine this is not mine I will not take this this is so there was no such compulsion
[Guest]: on their thing and of course there was a mild caste thing underlying thing but that was
[Guest]: not so pronounced as it is today but they were making their choices very wisely and
[Guest]: they were constructing a broad platform like Nehru constructed the idea of India in a very
[Guest]: broad fashion these people and I think in every literature it was happening every regional
[Guest]: space it was happening they were all seeing Aurobindo they were seeing Nehru they were
[Guest]: seeing Gandhi and they were constructing a very different kind of cultural space see
[Guest]: in Kannada Ramakrishna Paravamsa, Aurobindo all are huge influences Tagore the Bengalis
[Guest]: the Bengali cultural you know milieu and literature and all of that had a huge influence and they
[Guest]: were constructing similar and they were there was a spiritual kind of a you know I mean
[Guest]: element to their writing and there was a liberal humanist streak and there was experiential
[Guest]: elements and the two novels that Kuvampu wrote Malagalalli Madhumagulu and Kanuru Subba Mahigrithi
[Guest]: are I think the two of the greatest novels that I have read I mean I have read Marquez
[Guest]: I have read Joyce I have read you know I mean Hemingway and I have I mean sort of even Tolstoy
[Guest]: but I think it stands in that same kind of place it takes the same kind of importance
[Guest]: in my mind you know I mean and unfortunately it's not translated well there have been attempts
[Guest]: and it's not so great but then you know I wouldn't worry about the translation bit because
[Guest]: why I mean it's it's I mean it's it's difficult it's difficult to translate and convince another
[Guest]: audience I'll I'll I have another comment on translation itself see I mean there are
[Guest]: people who write to be translated and there are people who write for an audience they
[Guest]: have a dialogue with their people so therefore you don't see a Lankesh being translated because
[Guest]: he's having a dialogue with his community but there are certain writers in Kannada who
[Guest]: are only known as pan-indian greats for example Karnad did not write good Kannada at all and
[Guest]: he he speaks about it himself so so I mean Anant Murthy did not have a body of work he
[Guest]: spoke more in fact Sharda Prasad very jokingly used to tell me that I think P V Narasimha
[Guest]: was the chairman of the Nanpeet committee when Anant Murthy got it and P V N and Sharda
[Guest]: Prasad were great friends so P V N asked him what do you think so he said I told Narasimha
[Guest]: to sort of give it to him with the condition that his you know he writes more that's a
[Guest]: that's a kind of interesting thing so there are I mean I'm not trying to say that they
[Guest]: only wrote to be translated and if Samskara was not translated by Ramanujan I don't think
[Guest]: it would have become such a big thing you know I mean because there were lots of similar
[Guest]: stuff being written in different Indian languages at that point of time and there was the central
[Guest]: saithya academy which for which which had a mandate to get Indian languages to have
[Guest]: a dialogue between themselves it was not English centric not everybody wanted to get into English
[Guest]: so you're enriching English you're not enriching your regional languages what is coming into
[Guest]: you is a third or third degree or fourth degree removed kind of a thing reality that's coming
[Guest]: into your languages so you're translating a Paulo Coelho or some other person or another
[Guest]: person but you are not actually translating between Indian languages so this is something
[Guest]: that I raised when recently there's some very big translation a fellowship was announced
[Guest]: by the New India Foundation I wrote up my column in the Express saying why this is you
[Guest]: know I mean something that lacks vision so you are giving so much money for somebody
[Guest]: who's translating from an Indian language into English and so finally English gets enriched
[Guest]: so that's something that has happened with English all the while because of its colonial
[Guest]: kind of legacy or whatever English has borrowed so much from these languages and it has enriched
[Guest]: itself but Kannada or a Telugu or a Tamil or a Marathi see there it's understandable
[Guest]: because they don't get the same kind of importance or same kind of value if it is if it is bit
[Guest]: between Indian languages because it gets sort of dissipated for them you know it that philanthropy
[Guest]: doesn't look big if it doesn't come into English English is like an approval gang right it
[Guest]: is like academicians who become approvers of everything that is getting written or spoken
[Guest]: about they say somebody sitting in JNU or in Harvard or wherever or they say this is
[Guest]: great oh it's great so these kind of approval gangs get created and they start judging literatures
[Guest]: and without knowing much about what is happening inside them and that becomes possible because
[Guest]: everything is getting into English and they access English and they think they can understand
[Guest]: or judge or make pronouncement based on their reading in English which is so very limited
[Guest]: so that's why I mean I have nothing against anglophone elites but you know when I always
[Guest]: look at it look at them with a bit of suspicion because you know I mean they are so confident
[Guest]: because they're using a language of power which is English they are using a language
[Guest]: which is just economically very very sound and it is that which is giving them confidence
[Guest]: to make pronouncement about the world and there is it calls for a greater humility to
[Guest]: sort of speak about anything that you don't understand or anything that is alien or anything
[Guest]: that you have not accessed in their originals so you know I mean and to just say that this
[Guest]: is a he's a great writer in Kannada or you say he's a great writer in Bengali without
[Guest]: having read even an original text in that language is a little you know I mean shoddy
[Guest]: kind of a thing so one has to be very careful of approval gangsters what I always tell myself
[Guest]: because I don't need endorsements when you know I mean I've I know that you know I mean
[Guest]: things are far more complex so this was the kind of the larger broad-based even a person
[Guest]: like Ananthamurthy till that generation Ananthamurthy or a Lankesh or all these people created a
[Guest]: kind of Kannada or the after the earlier whatever it was very broad there was so much of enlightenment
[Guest]: Europe in it there was so much of reason there's so much of you know many experiential elements
[Guest]: getting mainstreamed and so much of different castes coming in bringing in their experiences
[Guest]: of course that got expanded in the 70s and the 80s but that took you in a different direction
[Guest]: so all of this was happening but what happens in the 90s or yeah late 90s I would say is
[Guest]: that the sub-nationalist cultures start borrowing the what I call the Shiv Sena model so they
[Guest]: that becomes a kind of exclusionary thing oh no this is not Kannada oh no this is not
[Guest]: it had started in Kannada in the 70s in fact I refer to an incident in my book where Anakrishna
[Guest]: a great man otherwise you know objecting to M.S. Subalakshmi singing you know we're not
[Guest]: singing Purandara or whatever they were great friends but then he sort of you know makes
[Guest]: a symbolic protest and he says you should sing Purandara and all that so I mean at a
[Guest]: particular concert you know it was just there and so that kind of a streak entered into
[Guest]: the sub-nationalist cultures where they it started in a very gentle literary specific
[Guest]: way but then it got expanded into a larger culture and then the chain the activism the
[Guest]: language activism had wonderful faces as great great faces but they all became lumpen elements
[Guest]: you know and suddenly used I mean people who represented Kannada or who spoke for the primacy
[Guest]: of Kannada or who sort of started painting the boards black or people who sort of created
[Guest]: a kind of environment which started excluding a lot of things and then they started there
[Guest]: are certain people whom who are very very close to me who sort of taught me how to look
[Guest]: at the world in a wonderful way to sort of perceive Chomsky, Derrida, Lacan or Foucault
[Guest]: everybody you know in trying to you know grapple all of that those very same people in the
[Guest]: 90s started speaking a very different thing they started saying that it's enough you know
[Guest]: Kannada is enough why do why do we need the crutches of any other language why do we need
[Guest]: to they were not see they never they were not bilinguals in the sense that they did
[Guest]: not write in both the languages they were you know monolinguals in the sense that they
[Guest]: wrote in Kannada but had new English read in English read English but did not write
[Guest]: in English now that is the kind of another little thing that we need to make so these
[Guest]: people started saying that you the knowledge the epistemological thing you have to create
[Guest]: knowledge in Kannada so Kannada is enough you don't need mirrors of other languages
[Guest]: so that you know they were all professors and teachers and were heading institutions
[Guest]: and departments and all that they started changing the way their students think so these
[Guest]: people who are under them started thinking that it is enough to be a Kannada person it's
[Guest]: it's not important to have a dialogue with somebody who's outside of Karnataka and those
[Guest]: dialogues were not to be had in the in the manner that they were being held earlier which
[Guest]: is you know I mean on broad terms even if you had it was on very narrow terms it was
[Guest]: for a seminar so you go you get it translated you read you make a kind of you know show
[Guest]: of it and you just come back so there was no organic kind of exchange that was happening
[Guest]: so that got I think that phase made Kannada and the sub-nationalist thing very very very
[Guest]: sad in fact so when you became an independent state or when you became a linguistic state
[Guest]: in say 56 there was a huge difference between the idea of the nation and the idea of the
[Guest]: sub-nation so you again build bridges you said I was the daughter of that mother and
[Guest]: mother of this daughter you try to create a kinship relationship with an abstract idea
[Guest]: called India and there was this real ground beneath your feet and you try to create that
[Guest]: kinship relationship and that was an arrangement you knew everybody knew that was an arrangement
[Guest]: that you were creating because Gandhi had created that atmosphere there was this idea
[Guest]: of independence and all that had happened so but now and so you were different and therefore
[Guest]: you became a union of states in the first place you were culturally different you could
[Guest]: not be put with say Assam or Bengal or whatever you were different so you there were pebbles
[Guest]: in a thing they were not a soup lovely way to put it right so there were pebbles they
[Guest]: were all there so now what happened was now we speak about so much about Hindutva we speak
[Guest]: about this whole nationalism one language so now these people sub-nationalist agenda
[Guest]: and nationalist agenda have sort of somewhere merged or sort of come closer together because
[Guest]: these people also speak of an exclusionary language they also speak of an exclusionary
[Guest]: language they say it's only for Hindus only India only for only Hindi and these people
[Guest]: say only Canada and when they say only Canada they're excluding everybody and Canada becomes
[Guest]: only a language an instrument you can what you put into that Canada you could be speaking
[Guest]: the language of NRC and CA in that language and you can be speaking the language of anti
[Guest]: hijab or anti whatever in that language so but that language became alienated from the
[Guest]: linguistic culture linguistic culture and language became two different entities so
[Guest]: the linguistic culture had a broader thing had a bigger thing so you forgot about that
[Guest]: you just made the language you know you reduce the language to a kind of instrument of communication
[Guest]: that's it it did not carry the culture and the tradition and the heritage and all that
[Guest]: you had used to build this wonderful plank for 30 40 years so that is where so so when
[Guest]: when this whole Hindi thing was happening and that hashtag don't impose an imposition
[Guest]: of Hindi and all that I wrote a piece in the mint a long 2000 word piece saying opposing
[Guest]: Hindi alone is not sufficient if you're talking you talk about linguistic cultures because
[Guest]: it's okay you will oppose Hindi you want Canada in its place or Telugu or Tamil in its place
[Guest]: but what is Tamil and Telugu doing Tamil and Telugu are speaking the same language that
[Guest]: they are sort of advocating in a different context and in a different space so you have
[Guest]: to sort of actually draw from your own past your own history your own heritage and make
[Guest]: yourself more acceptable and more accommodative and more open and more inclusive and that
[Guest]: is something which is not happening and that is where these ruptures have happened and
[Guest]: that is why the initial question that you asked about the death of a bilingual is a
[Guest]: far more serious thing for me than just two people I mean one person talking two languages
[Guest]: having gone away it's not just as simple as that it is actually a cultural crisis of a
[Guest]: huge magnitude which we don't seem to be paying attention to so it is not about just merely
[Guest]: felicity with two languages it's about the imaginations and cosmologies and world and
[Guest]: then the world views of two languages which don't seem to sort of sit next to each other
[Guest]: anymore they sort of you know operate in silos and operate in compartments and then you know
[Guest]: there is a very false agenda that is being put forward to notionally or nominally keep
[Guest]: the idea of subnationalism alive so it has become very tragic actually you know you invoke
[Guest]: the same activist invoke the name of Kuvempu but haven't read Kuvempu, Kuvempu has not
[Guest]: advocated that the same people speak of Karanth they put all their pictures and they say we
[Guest]: are a Kannada organization but they don't seem to have read anything that these people
[Guest]: have written and that is not the Kannada that's not the modern Kannada imagination that they
[Guest]: actually built for the initial decades of this new state so for me the trigger is very
[Guest]: interesting but the death that Ram spoke about is very correct very genuine but it's not
[Guest]: just as simple as two languages it's far more far more.
[Amit Varma]: That's very illuminating and the part that I want to double down on is the irony that
[Amit Varma]: movements that look so different like the nationalism that stresses Hindi or the subnationalism
[Amit Varma]: which stresses a particular kind of Kannada are actually similar if you look deeper because
[Amit Varma]: they are both exclusionary as you put it and I think that too much of political difference
[Amit Varma]: really isn't political difference you know these days we think in terms of tribes while
[Amit Varma]: I think we need to think more in terms of ideas so it might seem for example that you
[Amit Varma]: know that Hindutva today is the opposite of what happened in Pakistan but the point is
[Amit Varma]: it's in a sense it's the same thing you're saying that this is you know one nation one
[Amit Varma]: religion basing nationhood on that similarly a Hindi nationalism and a Kannada nationalism
[Amit Varma]: may seem opposed to each other but they're actually the same and similarly even like
[Amit Varma]: you know I keep saying Vox and Bhakts are the same because it's you know you're reducing
[Amit Varma]: a person to their identity and forcing upon them a narrative of either victimhood or oppression
[Amit Varma]: when of course we contain multitudes and we have to be able to have those conversations.
[Amit Varma]: My next question is actually about what appears in my mind to be even contradictory or two
[Amit Varma]: opposite things simultaneously existing or two opposite processes simultaneously existing
[Amit Varma]: and I don't know what I make of it I don't think I've thought through it enough so I'll
[Amit Varma]: ask you what you think of it. One is a danger of homogenization for example you know I did
[Amit Varma]: an episode on Indian food with Vikram doctor and he spoke about the Cavendish banana and
[Amit Varma]: the funda of the Cavendish banana is it's a kind of banana which was in India it got
[Amit Varma]: taken out it got exported out and then in the US and Latin America and whatever it got
[Amit Varma]: mass produced factory produced and it was amenable to scale it would last a long time
[Amit Varma]: and it basically took over the world and other bananas died and now the Cavendish and then
[Amit Varma]: the Cavendish banana came to India where it is now destroying all indigenous varieties
[Amit Varma]: and you have a homogenization there where there is a fear that all these other beautiful
[Amit Varma]: banana types will disappear. Now I sometimes worry about a similar thing happening with
[Amit Varma]: language like even within elite circles or academia you spoke about the approval gang
[Amit Varma]: which is a phrase I love so much and you know Snigdha Poonam in her book dreamers and I
[Amit Varma]: did an episode with her about young Indians also spoke about this craze in small towns
[Amit Varma]: everywhere for learning English. English became this big aspirational thing so a Kannada person
[Amit Varma]: will want to learn English a Tamil person will want to learn English. English is that
[Amit Varma]: common point similarly when you spoke about translation which is such a great point that
[Amit Varma]: you made that Kannada is getting translated to English Tamil is getting translated into
[Amit Varma]: English why not to each other why not that dialogue so there is this danger of a kind
[Amit Varma]: of centralization and a homogenization so that is one strand but a strand that seems
[Amit Varma]: to me to be running in the opposite direction which I have a lot of hope for is a sort of
[Amit Varma]: decentralizing strand where across different fields I find that the mainstream is dissipating
[Amit Varma]: the center is not holding like I would say this is true of music for example at least
[Amit Varma]: Western music which I'm far more familiar with where there is no longer a mainstream
[Amit Varma]: you know rock was mainstream maybe from the Beatles or Dylan going electric to Nirvana
[Amit Varma]: as Steve Van Zandt sent in a recent interview a link and you know but the mainstream has
[Amit Varma]: dissipated and now it's decentralized I won't even call it niches it's just decentralized
[Amit Varma]: in media we have seen that that you had your mainstream media in the 90s you had a consensus
[Amit Varma]: on the truth now I feel mainstream media is completely irrelevant in India and we are
[Amit Varma]: completely decentralized and I net net I think it's a good thing because it empowers individuals
[Amit Varma]: of course there are problems like the fake news economy and all of that where we are
[Amit Varma]: constantly in narrative battles and truth doesn't have the value and in some senses
[Amit Varma]: I feel that even at the level of governments the power that nation-states have will dissipate
[Amit Varma]: with technology where a nation-state cannot stop you know a culture and cannot constrain
[Amit Varma]: it within its borders we are all talking to each other one way or the other so these are
[Amit Varma]: two you know two different movements that I see going in two different directions one
[Amit Varma]: is this homogenization driven by you know economic imperative self-interest and it's
[Amit Varma]: all rational everybody's learning English that's what they want to learn right so there's
[Amit Varma]: one language for the home and there's one language for the rest of the world and the
[Amit Varma]: other is this sort of decentralization you see it in entertainment also like I used to
[Amit Varma]: love tik-tok because there was so much great entertainment great art I would say coming
[Amit Varma]: from small towns and villages in different languages even when I didn't understand the
[Amit Varma]: languages you could make out what was going on and just love it you know so what's your
[Guest]: take on you know I mean I think this whole one you know I mean the nation-state idea
[Guest]: itself is sort of limiting in the sense it's sort of you always are looking for an official
[Guest]: thing you know one language you know what I mean there is a constitution but then the
[Guest]: constitution has a different role to play but then it's not about oneness it's about
[Guest]: a set of rules that we have given ourselves or promised ourselves so that impulse is always
[Guest]: there when you sort of when the moment you frame something as a nation then that impulse
[Guest]: to homogenize is always very strong so the moment you made a Karnataka the moment you
[Guest]: made an Andhra Pradesh the impulse to impose a certain thing as the standard because this
[Guest]: canonical hierarchical arrangements are always sort of you know I don't know whether it's
[Guest]: default to the human mind or civilizational thinking or cultural thinking but it happens
[Guest]: so you want to have these hierarchies you want to say this is good you want to approve
[Guest]: so that approval gang thing comes there also you want to say this is right and this is
[Guest]: wrong you start thinking in binaries so there is the moment you start thinking in binaries
[Guest]: it's easy see that diversity is a cost in most of the time it's a cost so even companies
[Guest]: don't want too much of diversity because it's a cost it's you're you're actually bringing
[Guest]: upon yourself into doing a lot of things which actually don't need to be done and it's on
[Guest]: the name of political correctness or whatever so this whole impulse to homogenize is part
[Guest]: of the idea itself you know because you have to look like you have to you are this and
[Guest]: therefore you need an there is an enemy so you create Pakistan becomes your enemy although
[Guest]: they were your brother still for 1947 so you you have to create an enemy one enemy we don't
[Guest]: speak much about one enemy but we speak about one language but one enemy is also part of
[Guest]: the same agenda so so that homogenization thing is part it's it's it's there in the
[Guest]: it's embedded in the idea of the nation state itself so you think you have to think through
[Guest]: those terms otherwise it doesn't make sense but what happened why there is this kind of
[Guest]: counter thing that has happened is because the borders became irrelevant economic borders
[Guest]: became irrelevant and and and you know I mean this migration became such a big phenomena
[Guest]: and every Indian family now has seems to have traveled right so all that started getting
[Guest]: dismantled so the whole if at all I write a next I mean I'm writing two other books
[Guest]: but then the big book that I want to write is about the decline of the linguistic state
[Guest]: Wow right so the whole your how did you premise your idea of linguistic state when it was
[Guest]: conceived in the 20s and the Congress passed a resolution all of that happened you conceived
[Guest]: of it as a sealed border which had this language this language this language you thought of
[Guest]: it as the imagination itself was faulty you never thought there would come a time when
[Guest]: airplane travel would become cheaper they would there be internet the borders would
[Guest]: collapse there would be liberalization people would move within in inside the country outside
[Guest]: the country all of that was not imagined when these ideas came about so I think this is
[Guest]: a phase from the 90s I think from 2000s of the millennial generation is trying to make
[Guest]: sense of all that we imagined say 75 years ago this is a good time to think about it
[Guest]: because we are speaking about the Amrit Mahotsav and all that so what is it that we imagined
[Guest]: then and what is it that we have become now and how much of it is not our own making it
[Guest]: is because the world has changed and we have benefited immensely from that so you can say
[Guest]: globalization is bad there was a phase in Karnataka when all these seminars would have
[Guest]: this theme about globalization and every goddamn writer would say globalization has killed
[Guest]: this or globalized but they don't realize that globalization also brought great ideas
[Guest]: into you the internet also gave you a lot of great ideas you started accessing a lot
[Guest]: of things books that were not available and you know were very very expensive and a father
[Guest]: of mine had to you know take a loan to buy books you know became very expensive inexpensive
[Guest]: if you walk down that street you will get any book for you know I mean an affordable
[Guest]: price so a lot of good things happened so we are not this we are struck this earlier
[Guest]: generation which sort of framed these ideas and bought these ideas I mean and are stuck
[Guest]: it does stuck with those ideas don't know how to reconcile with this opening up and
[Guest]: I think that is a kind of negotiation that happens in a culture we have had this I'm
[Guest]: telling you this is not an experience that is for any culture the first time I can go
[Guest]: back to the 8th century I can go back to a text called Kaviraja Marga in Kannada and
[Guest]: it's a book of poetics and it tells you how to deal with Sanskrit how to deal with
[Guest]: Sanskrit Alankaras and it actually looks like it is borrowing a lot from Sanskrit but it's
[Guest]: actually creating an agenda for a Kannada kind of cultural space so you know I mean
[Guest]: you have constantly dealt with such a cultural influence Sanskrit was a huge problem for
[Guest]: Kannada so Kumar Vyasa Bharata is seen as the original Kannada Mahabharata because he
[Guest]: sort of shunned Sanskrit in a way that you know I mean is still celebrated so these kind
[Guest]: of what you call as like Russia has invaded Ukraine such invasions have happened culturally
[Guest]: also and a culture figure takes time to figure out but for the first time these cultures
[Guest]: feel a little more threatened or endangered if one has to use that kind of a language
[Guest]: is because English also has an economic power which is not just soft power which a Sanskrit
[Guest]: had a Sanskrit borrowed its soft power from several other kind of institutional arrangements
[Guest]: so English has economic power so money speaks so how does one counter the influence of a
[Guest]: language like that which leaves any local language I mean within gives it a clipped
[Guest]: existence you know you will you will stay there you will stay there as an artifact your
[Guest]: language will survive as an artifact but it will have a clipped existence it will not
[Guest]: have the ability to actually sit across the table and speak as an equal it loses that
[Guest]: ability and that is why I am a little apprehensive about fellowships or whatever which only promote
[Guest]: translation in one direction so you're actually contributing to that stream so there is a
[Guest]: larger argument to be made so you know and your software also the the Microsoft thing
[Guest]: that when it happened and when all of that was getting into regional languages they were
[Guest]: just templates that were coming from English so I met a very interesting I don't know what
[Guest]: has happened to him now he was used to be at the Harvard Kenneth Keniston so I interviewed
[Guest]: him for Deccanary way back in 96 or 97 and he spoke to me about localization of software
[Guest]: and he gave me an example of Argentina and he said I had been to Argentina and there
[Guest]: all the teachers in schools where free software and free computers have been given a ruling
[Guest]: that all our children are becoming little Microsoftians or whatever you know I mean
[Guest]: because you what we don't realize with the software thing it's a binary code that is
[Guest]: written the idea of time see when you talk in your languages time is very circular time
[Guest]: operates in a very concentric thing but here it is always linear there are lots of such
[Guest]: things elements even without you understanding gets into you and you start your imagination
[Guest]: and your approach and your cognitive things get a little affected or warped or you know
[Guest]: it moves away from your whatever thing so how does one handle the economic strength
[Guest]: of English and how does one handle the technological aspects which all again has English that the
[Guest]: primacy is English right see the whole structures and templates are all built primarily for
[Guest]: western audiences so that is the worry now so how does a small culture which is you know
[Guest]: I mean so they have surrendered so this culture now if you look at it the audiences are lost
[Guest]: I keep telling these people that okay you are now trying to dumb down do it you may
[Guest]: get your TRP today but you are actually killing your culture killing your audience sorry not
[Guest]: culture killing your audience because a slightly educated fellow will move away from watching
[Guest]: you so how many television or you know I mean channels in Canada does a middle-class family
[Guest]: watch I don't I mean it's it's it becomes it is not of their thing there is an aspirational
[Guest]: element they are moving up the chain they are getting software jobs they are being so
[Guest]: they are being sent on jobs to say Germany or somewhere in Europe or America whatever
[Guest]: they see new things and they can't reconcile what he is speaking there you know in an absolutely
[Guest]: narrow strange terms and then he says that is not important I'll consume my news on internet
[Guest]: so you're losing your audience newspapers have lost their audience because they've become
[Guest]: very narrow they've said I mean most newspapers I made this comment some years ago I said
[Guest]: the Sunday supplements of most newspapers reads like an obituary thing because they're
[Guest]: they're only involved and speaking about the past it's nostalgia somebody dies or you give
[Guest]: a full page and you say oh this man died and this is gone so the so you're only speaking
[Guest]: about your only sort of recording the decline of your culture you're not trying to reverse
[Guest]: the whole thing and say there are there are small groups there are of course enthusiastic
[Guest]: small groups trying to do this and that but you know of course you know they don't have
[Guest]: that kind of wherewithal to sort of scale the whole thing and become mainstream there
[Guest]: are always small groups and they do very interesting and fascinating work which one should not
[Guest]: dismiss so lightly even in Canada it happens and I'm I really appreciate what they do for
[Guest]: example the audiobooks kind of a thing that they're trying to do there are lots of good
[Guest]: work that happens but then the the the mainstream Canada thing which you very rightly pointed
[Guest]: on the mainstream thing looks very very weak and nobody people are getting disengaged with
[Guest]: it the larger audience the educated the upwardly mobile audience is getting disengaged and
[Guest]: you know what happens when that happens advertising stops coming into that media and then it becomes
[Guest]: a rag and I mean you know in one of your shows I heard Mrinal Pandey speak about this constant
[Guest]: thing about Hindi newspapers not getting advertising and why it doesn't get advertising and the
[Guest]: scale and so numbers may be very quote-unquote sexy because the reach may be high but what
[Guest]: is the purchasing power of that audience which reads those newspapers is a very very interesting
[Guest]: question that comes back and in the kind of economic arrangement that we have now there
[Guest]: is no input of money that is going and philanthropy which in a place like Bangalore plays a huge
[Guest]: huge role it does not understand the complexities of these cultural questions at all because
[Guest]: all these people have been software engineers or made their money through you know I mean
[Guest]: new economy industries and for them you know I mean philanthropy is to sort of create a
[Guest]: software for themselves and they don't engage with these real cultural issues that is where
[Guest]: the death of the bilingual is more important so I mean the death is because you don't understand
[Guest]: the other side not because you don't know the other language when I have far greater
[Guest]: respect for Ramchandra Guha because he understands that the other side is sort of there and I
[Guest]: have to respect it and for me that is a huge thing that acknowledgement is a huge thing
[Guest]: but a lot of people don't acknowledge that right so he sort of he may not be accomplished
[Guest]: in two or three languages like a lot of people but to know that there is that world out there
[Guest]: which is far more interesting complex intricate is an acknowledgement.
[Amit Varma]: So let me respond to some of the things you said because you know just thinking aloud
[Amit Varma]: like I spoke about that seeming contradiction between the centralizing impulse on the one
[Amit Varma]: hand the homogenization impulse on the one hand and the decentralization and while you
[Amit Varma]: were speaking I realized that one way of looking at it perhaps simplistically but largely still
[Amit Varma]: might have something to it is that politics has that centralizing and homogenizing impulse
[Amit Varma]: while culture goes in the other direction you know because for politics number one as
[Amit Varma]: Carl Schmitt the German theorist famously said that in politics you need an other and
[Amit Varma]: therefore in politics it makes there is this incentive to define everything in stock terms
[Amit Varma]: which leads to this kind of centralization conceptually which leads to homogenization
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and that's a political imperative but culturally you know culture is getting
[Amit Varma]: more and more decentralized now and the incentives there kind of go the other way and you know
[Amit Varma]: the other minor aspect you pointed out about Microsoftians creating on Microsoftians and
[Amit Varma]: time goes in a linear way I mean I use some software which is organized differently like
[Amit Varma]: for my notes I use Rome research which is based on the German system of Zettelkasten
[Amit Varma]: where everything is not quite linear or even orderly it can be circular it can you can
[Amit Varma]: go off in different directions so I think you know there is scope for doing a lot more
[Amit Varma]: than that but the other interesting thing that struck me was what you said about the
[Amit Varma]: dumbing down of the media and that's been a constant lament and I think there it's a
[Amit Varma]: combination of things that happen like when I started this podcast for example my you
[Amit Varma]: know my early episodes were 20-30 minutes my impression was that listen people have
[Amit Varma]: a short attention span everybody wants shallow content you gotta hook them in the first 15
[Amit Varma]: seconds and don't do more than 15 minutes 20 minutes one episode I did was 11 minutes
[Amit Varma]: and then over a period of time I realized everything about that was wrong one of course
[Amit Varma]: there are the you know people listen to podcasts as a captive audience when they're you know
[Amit Varma]: working out or commuting and so on so they are less likely to be distracted and also
[Amit Varma]: they listen at higher speeds like 2x 3x whatever and therefore they're consuming like one hour
[Amit Varma]: of content in half an hour of running but the most important factor was that we are
[Amit Varma]: wrong about what people want we don't live in the age of the short attention span people
[Amit Varma]: crave depth and they especially crave depth more today because the media doesn't give
[Amit Varma]: it to them and the media for all kinds of incentives economic incentive incentives being
[Amit Varma]: a big part of that because of the way our systems are structured they want to go what
[Amit Varma]: my good friend Prem Panicker calls a mile wide and an inch deep right and you know because
[Amit Varma]: you have you pay these enormous license fees to have a TV channel you you have price caps
[Amit Varma]: on you know subscriptions so it's advertising heavy you know unlike many other countries
[Amit Varma]: in the world so you have to cater to the lowest common denominator you don't have a choice
[Amit Varma]: and therefore you have that screamy shouty race to the bottom that we see in our news
[Amit Varma]: television and that holds for all other medium I mean that's where radio is different from
[Amit Varma]: podcasting because radio also you have license fees you have restrictions so you're going
[Amit Varma]: wide you're not going deep and and that's one thing I realized that people crave depth
[Amit Varma]: so much and the problem is when you're a mainstream media house and you're functioning under those
[Amit Varma]: kind of incentives where you don't have an option you have to go broad then you don't
[Amit Varma]: realize how many people there are who want to go deep and the point is a people who want
[Amit Varma]: to go deep they are also more engaged so even if my absolute numbers may be lower than say
[Amit Varma]: for the audience of a Shah Rukh Khan film just to take an extreme example or maybe that's
[Amit Varma]: a wrong example but the point is the engagement that anything that gives you depth is way
[Amit Varma]: way more so you know and that's again something that ideally should be sorted out but it isn't
[Guest]: because you know what are your thoughts being a media person?
[Guest]: Being a media person and having been an editor with brand managers and CEOs around I mean
[Guest]: you're absolutely bang on on this you know they constantly try to tell you that attention
[Guest]: spans have become smaller and people are not interested and I always wondered as to where
[Guest]: they got their feedback from you know I went to the same market I saw the same television
[Guest]: channel I read the same book see but there again you know I mean I don't mean disrespect
[Guest]: to any degree any person who holds an MBA degree but you know I mean look at the kind
[Guest]: of people put in charge of media houses when I worked with some of the biggest media houses
[Guest]: and look at the people who are put in charge of those media houses who are trained to make
[Guest]: money who are you know told that you have to make money and they don't sort of distinguish
[Guest]: between this and a Pepsi you know most of actually many of the media managers came from
[Guest]: Pepsi in fact who made a lot of money for these big houses came from you know I mean
[Guest]: people who sold sugared water so they actually they these same people when they're sent
[Guest]: to the car industry now we had a very interesting general manager I mean when I was still a
[Guest]: news editor and whatever so this man would had come from this thing that shut down you
[Guest]: know so he would come and he would say no no no front page you put this and therefore
[Guest]: there's a problem so I would always ask him see did you say the same thing in your
[Guest]: previous company did you tell them the headlights are looking a little wonky therefore I can't
[Guest]: sell the car so your job is to sell what we have given you because we think that we have
[Guest]: done a good job so go and sell it now don't come back and tell me that this product is
[Guest]: not working because of this problem so I mean the numbers rose we were doing well but there's
[Guest]: under such immense pressure from the owners that for them you know I mean they they try
[Guest]: to sort of make money everywhere and that that basically does not agree when you're
[Guest]: dealing with something like a newspaper or a magazine or whatever because it's a different
[Guest]: product it's a knowledge product so they don't seem to have that kind of their training their
[Guest]: academic training or their intellectual exposure or their whatever thing is very very limited
[Guest]: and narrow and confined and I wish you know I mean different kinds of people are put there
[Guest]: and different kinds of things happen I mean not it's not that everybody is like that but
[Guest]: you know unfortunately I am in every other person that I have met in newsrooms are like
[Guest]: that so I mean I used to have a lot of problem with the CEO kinds and the brand manager kinds
[Guest]: who would come and talk glib English but would have absolutely no idea as to what they were
[Guest]: talking about and then at the end of the day they would come and say you know I mean we
[Guest]: are trying to get some advertising feature from this politician for one week please don't
[Guest]: write anything against him so things like that you know I mean so you they are compromised
[Guest]: all the value systems that you sort of had that you should not compromise you're on you're
[Guest]: an uncompromising journalist you have a certain kind of professional you know I mean ethical
[Guest]: framework all of that they actually push you to violate every single day so how will journalism
[Guest]: survive so you may have made money in a small run but you've actually killed the industry
[Guest]: that's what I meant when I said you have killed the audience so that is why the non-mainstream
[Guest]: things are doing so well people rely more on the non-mainstream thing they would like
[Guest]: to listen to you more they would like to read something that is being offered and a bunch
[Guest]: of very interesting new media products in India now or abroad so I mean they have killed
[Guest]: their audience they don't realize that in the long run everything is gone and they have
[Guest]: permanently deleted that audience and then they go once that becomes mainstream they
[Guest]: go and play the same havoc so at least one has to sort of build a kind of firewall and
[Guest]: ensures that the whole thing has to be looked at differently as going forward so that is
[Guest]: why I always say when it comes to politics these congresses and keep speaking so much
[Guest]: of nostalgia I get really bugged they keep saying Nehru said this Nehru did this for
[Guest]: India he built the idea of democracy you know this all of this has been done so the simple
[Guest]: question if is that if you ran the country like that or if you did good things then why
[Guest]: do you have someone like person that we have now so the project that we need to sort of
[Guest]: political project or the cultural project that we need to have is not about restoration
[Guest]: of the past or the glorious Congress regime is not the restoration project that we need
[Guest]: to have as liberals today we have to sort of make correctives and build something new
[Guest]: and far more diverse and interesting so restoration is a huge huge problem because you have made
[Guest]: a lot of mistakes and therefore you have you are in the situation that you are in today
[Guest]: and if you are not reflective and if you think you were good and you were suddenly overnight
[Guest]: thrown away by some some kind of a current that came is wrong because everything builds
[Guest]: up and I often tell me in spite of my deep deep respect for someone like Manmohan Singh
[Guest]: Dr. Manmohan Singh I keep telling a lot of my Congress friends in my arguments that see
[Guest]: Devagoda had far greater democratic engagement than a Manmohan Singh, Manmohan Singh was
[Guest]: a technocrat you put him there for 10 years and there was no political engagement and
[Guest]: people thought that this is the weak weakest Prime Minister we have in his during his term
[Guest]: I don't think he was ever described as a strong man in 2009 I think that was the electoral
[Guest]: plank of Advani they called him the weak Prime Minister but you know the economy is doing
[Guest]: well and there were other reasons as to why they came back to power but the tragedy is
[Guest]: the Congress could not give a political person at the helm for 10 long years I understand
[Guest]: that as a stopgap arrangement that's not the ideal that we have to go back you have a CEO
[Guest]: running your government and you have a power system elsewhere so that is what this created
[Guest]: a urge for a strong leader and somebody sort of made use of that space so things have there
[Guest]: is a reaction and there is a reaction to things that you have there are consequences to the
[Guest]: your actions and we don't have to think of restoration so similarly culturally or media
[Guest]: or it applies to everything that we are speaking about I don't think we have to you know say
[Guest]: that I mean Madhubala was great so let's get another Madhubala there are new people coming
[Guest]: so you don't have to get into this nostalgia trip each time or retro thing and say that
[Guest]: all was great with Nehru and therefore we need to bring back the Nehru in India and
[Guest]: that was the biggest thing I don't think it was correct and and Nehru operated in a completely
[Guest]: different time and Nehru after the partition this is my understanding I may be wrong after
[Guest]: the partition had to build reason into the system so he used reason a lot of reason he
[Guest]: built brought in scientific temper he spoke of scientific temper he spoke like an enlightened
[Guest]: statesman you know when he used the principles of enlightenment and and all of that and created
[Guest]: an India which was which which thought logically you know or or propounded that or put it there
[Guest]: on the table and he had such big cherishment nobody cared what he spoke he they voted for
[Guest]: him or they voted for the Congress party because there was also the element of I mean independence
[Guest]: and the memory of independence and all that but now if you continue in that stream which
[Guest]: Rahul Gandhi never gets which is you Rahul Gandhi is logical he is very sincere he has
[Guest]: reason sorted out but there is no emotion but politics is all about emotion it's a fantastic
[Guest]: blend of reason and emotion and a great leader whoever across the world has operated by actually
[Guest]: fusing these two elements brilliantly the formulas could be different the the percentages
[Guest]: could be different but you don't communicate only invoking a certain kind of academic logic
[Amit Varma]: in the in the parliament no and I honestly don't think that there is even reason there
[Amit Varma]: in fact I think the Congress blunders continuously instead of celebrating Narsimha Rao and Manmohan
[Amit Varma]: Singh they celebrate Indira Gandhi and Sanjay Gandhi you know every every year when it's
[Amit Varma]: his birthday all the official Congress handles will talk about what a great guy he is and
[Amit Varma]: even Nehru you know the point is we have the sedition law today because after the court
[Amit Varma]: rule the courts ruled it unconstitutional in 1950 Nehru brought it back you know we
[Amit Varma]: remained a poor country for more than seven decades which is why 2014 happened you oppose
[Amit Varma]: the current guy I completely agree with you you oppose the current guy but understand
[Amit Varma]: where he came from and what's going on and frankly the current guy is more of the same
[Amit Varma]: right we we have the you know you can think in tribal terms and they can look like opposites
[Amit Varma]: but it's in a sense more of the same and a little worse and some margins you know earlier
[Amit Varma]: you made the point about the suits the MBAs the CEO types as you put it who only care
[Amit Varma]: about money and even there I think that they're not good suits and good MBAs if they care
[Amit Varma]: about money in the way that they do because they're caring about it in a short term way
[Amit Varma]: if you actually think long term you you'd kind of learn to sort of segment the market
[Amit Varma]: and realize that you know that this is not sustainable and earlier you'd mentioned very
[Amit Varma]: evocatively when you spoke about the little magazines how your father would put it together
[Amit Varma]: your mother would put the little stamp on it and you know you'd go on cycles and you
[Amit Varma]: deliver it to people and I think what was happening there and the reason that it worked
[Amit Varma]: was that there is that direct sense of who is reading it there is a sense of the human
[Amit Varma]: beings who are reading it and they're paying you for it and they're taking it and that
[Amit Varma]: keeps it alive and it dies out to some extent not because the audience dies out I feel but
[Amit Varma]: because the connect dies out and what I think we need to figure out all the metaphorical
[Amit Varma]: little magazines of the day is that one we need to realize that that audience is there
[Amit Varma]: if anything it's bigger than ever before and what we just need to figure out is figure
[Amit Varma]: out the logistics how do we get our work to them which is easier than ever before because
[Amit Varma]: of technology and more importantly how do they pay us and I think that's easy to sort
[Amit Varma]: out because you know one thing that I'm seeing in the creator economy is that more and more
[Amit Varma]: the one big shift is that creators are being able to get money directly from consumers
[Amit Varma]: you don't have to go via advertisers via sponsors all of that so I want to sort of talk about
[Amit Varma]: this personal aspect this people aspect also in a context that you brought up earlier where
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about you were reporting from Rajasthan and you you're chatting to Bhairon Singh Shikhawath
[Amit Varma]: who by one section of the media would be painted as one caricature another section would paint
[Amit Varma]: him as another caricature and you try to get behind the person and kind of go deeper in
[Amit Varma]: a sense what I try to do as well and what I find in in modern times is that we live
[Amit Varma]: in a world where there is almost we are incentivized to pass judgment all the time either to gain
[Amit Varma]: status within our own little tribes or to feel virtuous for ourselves that oh I made
[Amit Varma]: fun of him and therefore I'm better than him and so on and this really means that we start
[Amit Varma]: looking at the world in black and white ways and that there is a constructed world anywhere
[Amit Varma]: where you have polarized rhetoric so and so is evil so and so is you know a paragon of
[Amit Varma]: virtue and we start kind of falling into those lines and it strikes me that what we need
[Amit Varma]: is more of what you were doing and more of what good journalists do today where you go
[Amit Varma]: deeper figure out the personal you know figure out basically you delve in all the shades
[Amit Varma]: of grey and you make that concrete like you know to me a lot of the dangerous ideas that
[Amit Varma]: we have around us are abstract ideas nationalism and purity and all of these and our lived
[Amit Varma]: reality when we are actually engaging with the concrete is not like that at all you know
[Amit Varma]: you you know in your Devegada book which maybe we'll have to talk about in a separate episode
[Amit Varma]: because it's just got so much I want to talk five hours about that but in that book you
[Amit Varma]: speak about how his secularism was a lived secularism it came from concrete things you
[Amit Varma]: know he could see his you know father employ a Muslim in the field who's teaching him Urdu
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and his lived experiences leading to a secularism not some ideological
[Amit Varma]: abstract thing and in your view what can people like us or people like whoever's listening
[Amit Varma]: to this conversation or just society as a whole what can we do to sort of start privileging
[Amit Varma]: the concrete more over the abstract because we are ruled all around us by abstract rhetoric
[Amit Varma]: by constructed realities by these imperatives that we have to pass judgment on others that
[Amit Varma]: there's our tribe and then everybody else is evil and so on and so forth and these abstract
[Amit Varma]: things break down the moment you have you know I mean maybe I'm being very idealistic
[Amit Varma]: but they tend to break down when you have you know engagement with the real world so
[Guest]: you know what are your thoughts no that's a very very profound question see you can't
[Guest]: separate the abstract Amit actually in the in a common man's life if you think of it
[Guest]: the abstract the biggest abstract is the God it begins with a prayer every morning and
[Guest]: you don't know where you're sending it up and you're reconciling with a lot of things
[Guest]: you know your there are religious ideas that have become so much part of you that you have
[Guest]: you either believe in your karma siddhanta like my character of my book Deva Gowda believes
[Guest]: and destiny and things like that and he's never offended with anything because he thinks
[Guest]: that oh I must have made some mistake in my past life so it's come to haunt me today so
[Guest]: so you reconcile all those are abstract ideas religion has given you that abstract ideas
[Guest]: it is what is constructed by politicians for a certain purpose and for a certain thing
[Guest]: which becomes problematic I don't think it's wonderful to be in a abstract kind of a thing
[Guest]: and also bring the concrete so that you see in a lot of these 12th century vachanas like
[Guest]: it was beautifully translated by Ramanujan I mean in English it's it sounds like this
[Guest]: you know I mean my legs are pillars my body the shrine the head a cupola of gold wow right
[Guest]: so you know I mean you are see that that particular thing
[Guest]: so you are blending the two so that was written for a common man so that man is actually weaving
[Guest]: you know I mean something or he's sewing I mean there is something happening in the fields
[Guest]: or he and he's speaking of this and he's invoking the God he's invoking the Lord so nature itself
[Guest]: sort of actually throws up a lot of abstract questions at you and I don't think you can
[Guest]: escape the abstract the political abstract is the question the political thing is a problem
[Guest]: and there I think it is common sense which has to come to play and we need more Deva
[Guest]: Gowda's there you know people may not like what I say or whatever but then if they read
[Guest]: my book they'll understand why that common sense plays such an enormous role to blend
[Guest]: this whole idea of the abstract and the thing and then sorts out politics in a completely
[Guest]: different way so so you can't escape the abstract the nation is of course the idea of a nation
[Guest]: was as I probably you know I mean not as foolproof as the idea of religion because religion sort
[Guest]: of appeals to us something else you know I mean it's about your being itself this is
[Guest]: an artificial construct that was created and even the linguistic state you know I mean
[Guest]: I was reading this Lisa Michelle who wrote a beautiful book on the South Indian linguistic
[Guest]: states and there she says that this whole idea of linguistic state was a late 19th century
[Guest]: idea it was not even there before that that you could construct a state around the idea
[Guest]: of a language where did it come from so so those things are the abstract I mean I'm fascinated
[Guest]: by the abstract poetry is abstract for me I mean half my life would not have been so
[Guest]: I mean interesting or enriching if there was no poetry and and if Bendre doesn't make sense
[Guest]: half the time but the sounds are so good language itself is abstract at times so there is no
[Guest]: escaping the abstract it is that that is this engineered abstraction that we try to bring
[Guest]: and put it there and make politics out of it is something that is the problem according
[Guest]: to me but I mean this is something that you threw at me and I have just tried to think
[Amit Varma]: about it on the spot so I may be wrong no no it's it's opened up a new dimension for
[Amit Varma]: me to think about and you mentioned poetry and you know when you mentioned that editor
[Amit Varma]: at the Irish newspaper where you worked where she sadly drowned herself and I thought yeah
[Amit Varma]: and I thought of this beautiful poem which I really love which blends the abstract and
[Amit Varma]: the concrete in this lovely way so I'll read it out it's it's called not waving but drowning
[Amit Varma]: by Stevie Smith nobody heard him the dead man but still he lay mourning I was much further
[Amit Varma]: out than you thought and not waving but drowning poor chap he always loved locking and now
[Amit Varma]: he's dead it must have been too cold for him his heart gave way they said oh no no no it
[Amit Varma]: was too cold always still the dead one lay mourning I was much too far out all my life
[Amit Varma]: and not waving but drowning just just that image of not waving but drowning that concrete
[Amit Varma]: image but it really kind of speaks to you and since you mentioned commonsensical I want
[Amit Varma]: to read out this little bit by Montek Singh Aluwalia on Devagad from your book where Montek
[Amit Varma]: says and I'm quoting you quoting Montek you know he had this habit of looking very sleepy
[Amit Varma]: I have noticed that even when he appeared to be in a somnolent kind of state one ear
[Amit Varma]: was always open and whenever something needed to be said he would say it without missing
[Amit Varma]: anything my favorite recollection is that on one occasion we were trying to raise the
[Amit Varma]: price of LPG gas as subsidy was building up so we said that it is one thing to have targeted
[Amit Varma]: subsidy but to keep all cooking gas at low price is not helpful one minister was arguing
[Amit Varma]: that if you raise the price it will hurt the common man immediately Gowda who was in a
[Amit Varma]: somnolent appearance disagreed and now these are Gowda's words you know what is happening
[Amit Varma]: in Delhi cooking gas has been used by all rich people to cook seekh and tikka kebabs
[Amit Varma]: for their parties he said and offered to take us around one evening to show how many lavish
[Amit Varma]: parties were fueled by subsidized cooking gas these guys can afford to pay why should
[Amit Varma]: we subsidize that was an earthy response this would not have been the response of a civil
[Amit Varma]: servant and then of course you kind of go on to point out what an actual geek or civil
[Amit Varma]: servant would have said where they would have said oh 20% of the people are using 80% of
[Amit Varma]: the benefits and rubbish like that and he went straight to the concrete and obviously
[Amit Varma]: that can also hurt because then you can confuse anecdata for data and make wrong decisions
[Guest]: Dev Gowda was good with both data and experience which is which was a surprise to me as I yeah
[Amit Varma]: I mean everything that you have written about his research habits his incredible work ethic
[Amit Varma]: and all of that is something we have to discuss in detail so the next time I come to Bangalore
[Amit Varma]: we can talk about Dev Gowda but right now I'm kind of enjoying this conversation too
[Amit Varma]: much so you know earlier on you spoke about how your view of the world was sort of shaped
[Amit Varma]: by this fortunate circumstance of having a family like you did parents like you did an
[Amit Varma]: environment like you did a bilingual environment like you did when it comes to journalism you
[Amit Varma]: know you did journalism here you went abroad and you did journalism you came back you've
[Amit Varma]: been an editor you know you worked in English journalism you worked in language journalism
[Amit Varma]: tell me a little bit about how your initial view of journalism was kind of shaped like
[Amit Varma]: why do we do journalism what are our values what is good journalism in a definitional
[Amit Varma]: sense how you kind of arrived at that and tell me a little bit about you know that sort
[Amit Varma]: of journey and whether you feel that whether you feel more hopeful now or less hopeful
[Guest]: now the last part is very difficult no but I never sort of defined journalism for myself
[Guest]: I was never a student of journalism and ever went to university to study journalism I was
[Guest]: a student of literature and culture so culture studies comparative literatures so I was in
[Guest]: a whole different world and then I happened to sort of get into a newsroom and the editor
[Guest]: was not very trusting of my me sustaining interest but somehow I sort of stayed back
[Guest]: and never went out went away or you know because I was I thought I was a little successful
[Guest]: and I could continue so I never defined what good journalism is for myself because I was
[Guest]: I thought what the place that I was in Deccan Herald and the kind of multiplicity of views
[Guest]: that I was seeing and the kind of assignments I was getting and what was getting published
[Guest]: was not very different from a very ideal kind of a situation you could write about some
[Guest]: philosopher called Derrida and you could get published you could write about Saeed, you
[Guest]: could write about Chomsky, you could write about a new director of the Max Buller Bowen
[Guest]: who has taken over and was great great new ideas you could write about Brecht in Canada
[Guest]: cinema and Hindi cinema and and Canada plays so you could I was just completely immersed
[Guest]: in my cultural and literary writing for Deccan Herald I did not think outside of it and also
[Guest]: the very first piece that I published was you know it was some kind of a tribute to
[Guest]: Adiga where I sort of wrote about Adiga and his poetry and sort of translated a small
[Guest]: little piece that he had written about me and my poetry and it was a very intensely
[Guest]: passionate piece when it was run again one page so I mean it became a kind of default
[Guest]: to get one page for me in Deccan Herald I mean I mean I have so many of those clippings
[Guest]: and if anybody cares to look at the archives they'll see how is this fellow you know I
[Guest]: mean getting so much of space it's not that I was writing something very big or I was
[Guest]: a great writer it didn't it wasn't that it was about the generosity of the editorship
[Guest]: of the time it was like you know I mean I always imagined that I should work in an environment
[Guest]: where someone like this Harold Evans worked and the Sunday Times and that kind of an ideal
[Guest]: kind of an environment where even a Philip Knightley was encouraged and he did a lot
[Guest]: of great stories but all of that came later see only after 2000 did I start looking at
[Guest]: journalism as journalism should be looked at until then for me it was a venue to get
[Guest]: my I mean half fulfilled literary or cultural ambitions in so it could be poetry or it could
[Guest]: be short stories or whatever but after 2000 something changed because I went on a shivning
[Guest]: scholarship to England and then so there was a it was a for print journalism and it was
[Guest]: a program for young print journalists there was this great man who was running the program
[Guest]: John Tullock who succumbed to cancer I think in 2016 if I remember right and there was
[Guest]: Adam Hopkins who was a travel writer and they were running the program and they sort of
[Guest]: put you in touch with great people like Edwin Taylor Edwin Taylor was someone who had designed
[Guest]: the Deccan Herald and designed half a dozen newspapers of the world and written a great
[Guest]: book with Harold Evans called pictures on the page on designing newspapers so I got
[Guest]: terribly terribly interested in the mechanics of putting a newspaper together the design
[Guest]: the the layout and you know picking a picture how should we look at that and of course reporting
[Guest]: and writing and there was a Putin Blair summit and because you were a shivning fellow you
[Guest]: were a giver you were given a pass to go and sit in the media you know thing so I went
[Guest]: and watched that I mean there was a great opportunity to grow and there I still when
[Guest]: I went to England I went as a provincial boy with my Kannada baggage and my literary baggage
[Guest]: and my cultural baggage and besides John Tullock and Adam Hopkins who are putting me who are
[Guest]: getting me to look at the mechanics of journalism a little more seriously I met this great mentor
[Guest]: who was still with who still mentors me Mr. Jeremy Seabrook and Jeremy Seabrook was such
[Guest]: a distinguished writer in England he was writing a column for the Guardian and he was given
[Guest]: to me as a personal mentor there was a system where you were given big writers as your mentors
[Guest]: I just met I think initially the plan was to give me Julian Bonds I mean there's some
[Guest]: such talk you know and that never happened but of course I I mean I happened to run into
[Guest]: him and said hello and all that but then just imagine getting a Julian Bonds and Jeremy
[Guest]: was no less because Jeremy had published some 30 40 books he had an India interest and he
[Guest]: was more than anything else he was someone who would give you time and he was empathetic
[Guest]: he would listen and not many people had that kind of would give you that kind of time so
[Guest]: he had I think injured his ankle and therefore he was at home and it gave me great opportunity
[Guest]: to sort of you know go and vomit all my ideas before him and then he would listen for an
[Guest]: hour or he's a great listener like you he would listen to ours together and then he
[Guest]: would come back with a response which was so terrific he would say see you are looking
[Guest]: at it in a very limited way so frame it this way look at it this way so go back and write
[Guest]: it this way and come back to me having read this so he was he gave me I think the grant
[Guest]: edition which was being edited by Ian Jack and it was about England and its loss of you
[Guest]: know greatness the Great Britain had become just Britain so it was something around that
[Guest]: and I forget the exact title of the grant issue and he had an essay in that about something
[Guest]: related and he gave me that and he said you can keep this copy and getting a grant free
[Guest]: for a student you know I mean was itself a very big thing so he said you can keep this
[Guest]: and I am not giving it to you because I have written a piece but then I want you to sort
[Guest]: of critique what I have written so then this was I thought he was sort of being very nice
[Guest]: to me and so I read that I went I discussed I keep going back to him his house was in
[Guest]: Muswell Hill so I mean I used to take the metro underground and reach his place and
[Guest]: it was 3 Springfield Avenue Muswell Hill is shifted to another house now closer by but
[Guest]: I used to go and I mean I thought I was boring him but he was very empathic and he was always
[Guest]: someone because he was a writer he would ask me very personal questions you tell you tell
[Guest]: me tell me something about your father what kind of a person is he what did he ask you
[Guest]: to read you know how did you grow up you know what kind of an him so he was basically also
[Guest]: soaking in my cultural environment he was trying to understand my family is understanding
[Guest]: where I am coming from and then this whole Kannada Kannada Kannada business that I had
[Guest]: in my head and literature literature and culture all that he sort of brought in a gently introduced
[Guest]: polemical ideas you know just just ruffled a few of them and then that expanded the way
[Guest]: I look at the world so I mean that is when I decided that this whole Kannada pride thing
[Guest]: had because I had written I think I translated a piece in for Deccanary called Kannada pride
[Guest]: and prejudice for the one of the November issues and I showed it to him and then he
[Guest]: said how that idea can be sort of expanded why you should not sort of limit yourself
[Guest]: to you know I mean one particular stream how you can actually make it richer by sort of
[Guest]: taking in other things and exploring it there and language is a great dynamic you know I
[Guest]: mean you put it into your language it becomes something else it is like you know in a recipe
[Guest]: where you mix a certain ingredient it becomes a separate dish so he said you should you
[Guest]: should sort of start exploring these things and then for the first time there was a huge
[Guest]: problem of migrants and there was this very harsh rhetoric that was being spoken in the
[Guest]: papers and British tabloids you know how they so he would tell me stories about migrants
[Guest]: and he would tell me why we shouldn't speak this language what is the history of the world
[Guest]: what is the history of migration and why you know these politicians are wrong and why you
[Guest]: should go and listen to that fellow who's talking at the completely nonsensical thing
[Guest]: but then you come back to me and tell me what he spoke and I'll tell you why that is wrong
[Guest]: and why you should always sort of have a broad worldview and inclusive worldview but also
[Guest]: be extremely conscious of the kind of atrocities committed by people in power how the policies
[Guest]: are shaped to suit a handful of people so he would give me examples and there was a
[Guest]: huge influx of Russian money at that time that had just about started I think at that
[Guest]: time so we would we used to sort of whenever we went for a walk you would say see this
[Guest]: is bought up by some some billionaire in Russia who's a faceless guy there's only a small
[Guest]: little outhouse where a servant stays and this house has never been lit up fully it
[Guest]: is just that little light that glows you know I mean he had a very poetic language he's
[Guest]: a he had a polemical sense he is he was superb in that sense and he had visited India innumerable
[Guest]: number of times and he had friends here he had written a lovely book for Pluto Press
[Guest]: called Another India and he was quite well known in Bangladesh because he had learnt
[Guest]: I mean he had worked very closely with the government workers there the workers there
[Guest]: and written a lot and he had worked in Thailand so he has extremely was very very familiar
[Guest]: with South Asia so the moment I said something he would just you know build the chain in
[Guest]: such a way that it would be became started becoming very fascinating so for the first
[Guest]: time when I went to England I started reading newspapers completely differently I wouldn't
[Guest]: start with the supplements I would start with the front page and then go to the edit page
[Guest]: read the edit in a very serious I would read edits here I would throw sort of do all that
[Guest]: here but you know the way I looked at a newspaper itself changed because the way I looked at
[Guest]: the world had changed can you elaborate on that yeah that is because this these inputs
[Guest]: were being given to me and what was appearing in newspapers I was allowed to critique them
[Guest]: so there were certain newspapers which were speaking a language of foul language and a
[Guest]: very unwelcome language about immigrants and then there was this teacher here a great teacher
[Guest]: was telling me that but Great Britain's economy was built by immigrants see look at how much
[Guest]: they have contributed and he was he was from Northampton he had studied at Cambridge he
[Guest]: was a local person and when a local person tells you that it becomes far more authentic
[Guest]: so then then you start transport when transpose yourself into the Canada situation and you're
[Guest]: sitting here and if you say that that fellow who's a Hindiwala or a Marwadi or a Bengali
[Guest]: fellow so I became extremely conscious and I said I shouldn't talk that language that
[Guest]: is not the language that has to be spoken in a civilized world so look at how Jeremy
[Guest]: is speaking about people who have come to his land to his city and have made a life
[Guest]: there and and sort of enriched that thing in fact he wrote a intellectual history of
[Guest]: immigrants later which was I think released in the House of Commons later so it's a it's
[Guest]: a thick fat book so he was he was that is the the way I looked at newspapers change
[Guest]: because there was a teacher who was telling me see you've come yourself to come here to
[Guest]: sort of train yourself to become an editor later or become a better journalist so you
[Guest]: have to lot of absorb all these things and then of course there was I read Harold Evans
[Guest]: very seriously the good times and the bad times and the Murdochian revolution was taking
[Guest]: place so then the whole thing was getting dismantled the layoffs was happening I read
[Guest]: John Pilger very very seriously when I went there because I think I went and listened
[Guest]: to a lecture that he was giving somewhere and then he had problematized all this whole
[Guest]: revolution that was taking place inside journalism the commodification the the kind of straight
[Guest]: jacketing of ideas the kind of dumbing down you know reduction of pages for literature
[Guest]: or whatever all that sort of you know was put into a context for me when I went to England
[Guest]: and then there was a magazine that used to come to Jeremy's I was used to I think write
[Guest]: also for the New Internationalist so he used to say New Internationalist had a completely
[Guest]: different perspective of the world and there was New Statesman of course and there was
[Guest]: the bunch of other magazines and then you went out to make calls to India there was
[Guest]: these red little booths and you saw all these porn stickers stuck there saying call this
[Guest]: number I am available you know those that was also a shock there was Soho and there
[Guest]: was all those things it culturally shook you up and saying that oh the world that you imagined
[Guest]: staying in Bangalore all these years is not just Maleshwaram or Basangudi here you are
[Guest]: not even willing to accept the cantonment and here you are in this huge big city that
[Guest]: everything is so very big so it I became completely conscious of that fact that what I know what
[Guest]: I understand what I perceive is very very limited it's better to be humble and pick
[Guest]: up things as I go on rather than be didactic and say I am right I have come from India
[Guest]: it's a great culture I have a family like this my father is this so and so and my father
[Guest]: was a very influential figure in Canada so I mean I had gone with that baggage but then
[Guest]: it sobered me down so much and then that changed my journalism so it was basically a shock
[Guest]: and then because I was into this there was a placement thing that would happen as part
[Guest]: of the fellowship and I think it was John Deluxe idea to send me to Irish times in Dublin
[Guest]: so I went from one city to another European city and that oh my god that was completely
[Guest]: different from London and here you know people would you know very very with great difficulty
[Guest]: nod at you or smile at you when you're in the tube or when you were walking on the street
[Guest]: or in the supermarket and supermarket was not so difficult because you had Indians but
[Guest]: you went to Southall to bring your masala and stuff like that but here in Dublin the
[Guest]: very first encounter was different you know I met this editor called Kiran Fagan and Kiran
[Guest]: said what are you doing here come let's have a drink so that was a completely different
[Guest]: language it's not that I was much of a drinker or whatever I mean I did not sort of alcohol
[Guest]: you know I mean my family was a vegetarian family because you know there was a this whole
[Guest]: process of Sanskritization that Ambedkar and later MN Srinivas speak about which was I
[Guest]: think part of that part of that family construct that if you are you know elevating yourself
[Guest]: you have to give up these things and they were more loyal to the Sringeri mutt and the
[Guest]: Shankar mutt and all that so here was I go there and this man who's supposedly you know
[Guest]: going to take care of me for the next few months and he's saying come let's have a drink
[Guest]: and he's sort of giving getting me the dark stout thing you know and he asked me saying
[Guest]: they just taste it it's not going to knock you off and then one comes the second one
[Guest]: comes and then I'm I become very very so I mean my this whole inside the I mean it sort
[Guest]: of I became this moralistic there's this element of moral thing fiber that gets woven into
[Guest]: your learning and reading and all that if you are in a certain setup and that you know
[Guest]: you choose because if you drink you think you're a bad man if you smoke you're you get
[Guest]: you start to start you know classifying people like that oh he has bad habits so drinking
[Guest]: was a bad habit which was sort of put into me very early in my life eating non-vegetarian
[Guest]: food was a was not such a welcome thing smoking is no no you know that kind of a thing because
[Guest]: my parents and my grandparents were all in that kind of a bubble and you learn to judge
[Guest]: people on the basis of their habits or their orientation that orientation was still not
[Guest]: clear to me gay or being a being a LGBT person you never learned all that here you know because
[Guest]: your culture never even people did not even bring it on their lips and their tongues and
[Guest]: this but all of that started becoming opening up there so you went here and you first thing
[Guest]: that the man says who's using a senior who's supposed to take care of you says come let's
[Guest]: have a drink and that completely brought down walls for me and it was such a fascinating
[Guest]: you're such a great good man he was he treated you as an equal he took you there to the pub
[Guest]: and then he bought you a drink and then he put you into the newsroom and he put you and
[Guest]: he sort of made such a gave such a glowing introduction to all his senior colleagues
[Guest]: and the other senior editors he said he's a bright young man who's got the finest fellowship
[Guest]: and he's come from India he was in London but the London people have some good sense
[Guest]: they have given him to us so we have to sort of take care of me I want him to go back with
[Guest]: good memories that's what he said what a remarkable man he was and then he then said Caroline
[Guest]: this boy I think knows a lot of English literature you you will find him use useful so why don't
[Guest]: you sort of speak to him you know the people were so welcoming and they would take me home
[Guest]: in England I except for my mentors drawing room I would have I had not entered anybody's
[Guest]: home and here people said you come home Saturday oh come we'll go trekking yo we'll go to that
[Guest]: island the things like that started happening I used to share an apartment with a lady called
[Guest]: Barbara Clinton and this lady is again you know I mean she was working with another rival
[Guest]: newspaper or I think she was doing some work for other newspapers and she was a single
[Guest]: lady and she was again very welcoming in her home you know I mean this whole dynamics changes
[Guest]: right you're a Hindu boy provincial boy going to England staying in an apartment shared
[Guest]: with by another lady and you are you don't know whether you have to tell your parents
[Guest]: or your mother especially that you know is this lady also living with me I mean it's
[Guest]: all perfectly normal there and you learn to navigate those choppy waters or which is cultural
[Guest]: shock for you and because nobody in my family had gone abroad to study my father was so
[Guest]: enlightened but he had never crossed the seas he went abroad much later after all of us
[Guest]: took him abroad he went to Europe and my brother settled down in the US and became a citizen
[Guest]: there so he facilitated it much later but all of that came later for him England he
[Guest]: would he could speak so beautifully about London streets through his reading he could
[Guest]: speak of you know I mean Russia so you know I mean with such passion I mean that through
[Guest]: his reading so everything was a textual kind of a thing that had reached him but he had
[Guest]: never crossed the seas physically so this was for me you know in a lot of ways it opened
[Guest]: up and so journalism obviously had to be a cosmopolitan idea it could not have been a
[Guest]: kind of narrow whatever agenda with which you drive it so it was a cosmopolitan thing
[Guest]: because you had benefited from it and you had seen it function you had seen the great
[Guest]: examples there and so then I did I had to figure out where does Canada figure if I am
[Guest]: trying to embrace the world with such speed so Canada has to be somewhere it can't go
[Guest]: away and even if I want to sort of you know flush it down it won't go away so how does
[Guest]: it work out so that is when Jeremy sort of navigated my journey and he said that you
[Guest]: can be for the first time I think I heard it from him he said you can be rootedly cosmopolitan
[Guest]: that's such a lovely phrase rootedly cosmopolitan and I use it much a lot in my writing later
[Guest]: I've used it later and I don't think I've attributed to my guru because guru is part
[Guest]: of me you know I there is sort of invoke the Indian thing I mean I am part of him and he's
[Guest]: part of me so I mean it's like the guru shishya parampara so what is his is mine you know
[Guest]: that kind of a thing so he used it very very I don't think he used it in the exact same
[Guest]: way but then he spoke about you can be rooted and you can be cosmopolitan at the same time
[Guest]: and your cosmopolitanism is not confined to the English language alone because there was
[Guest]: this construct that if you had to be cosmopolitan you had to speak the English language and
[Guest]: if you are living in Bangalore if you want to appear cosmopolitan you have to go to Koshy's
[Guest]: and come to the MG road and roam around the brigade road looking at all the girls in many
[Guest]: skirts and go back and say that oh I've had a cosmopolitan experience so so that those
[Guest]: notions of the English divide of the other all of that sort of sort of this great man
[Guest]: sort of you know pushed me to sort of I mean it made me dismantle all of it so it more
[Guest]: than say again as I told you earlier Amit it was not it was not always trying to bring
[Guest]: correctives to my journalism it was about everything so if you bought correctives to
[Guest]: the way you look at then your journalism automatically changes the kind of topics that you pick to
[Guest]: write will change the kind of you know I mean language you use will change the diction will
[Guest]: change the tone will change the way you approach people will change so with all this I came
[Guest]: back to India and I would have happily settled down in Dublin but then there was a huge labor
[Guest]: problem and union problem and all that they could not have absorbed me although they were
[Guest]: very very kind and they said we want you for more and they gave me a lovely letter at the
[Guest]: end of the day I still preserve and I mean I feel a little embarrassed to frame it or
[Guest]: whatever but then they said Sugata was here and he was such a great colleague and he was
[Guest]: there on the South Asia desk and LTT problem was big those days so then I used to sort
[Guest]: of write a few copies on that and then he had special interest in Irish language thing
[Guest]: and all that but his knowledge of English literature put all of us to shame was the
[Guest]: I mean can you believe somebody writing that in a letter of recommendation or a letter
[Guest]: of whatever I mean there was there such good people you know and I felt that I was a mini
[Guest]: success and I came back to India and here then of course I went to Jaipur and Veer Sanghvi
[Guest]: had taken over the Hindustan Times and there was nobody to go to Jaipur to look after the
[Guest]: news desk so I went there as a news editor and with all this baggage and in a new culture
[Guest]: and Godhra was just happening and I was just put in the middle of elections and riots and
[Guest]: all that and I had to figure this all out which I had not until then because I was in
[Guest]: this very secure cultural literary bubble in Deccan Herald and England had sort of shaken
[Guest]: me up given me a way to look at all this but then I was now actually thrown there I was
[Guest]: a young news editor a very young person and I had people who had served the organization
[Guest]: for 30 years 25 years there and I had to handle them there was a young team also but there
[Guest]: was I had to reconcile and so my whole approach of managing reconciling these age differences
[Guest]: these language differences cultural difference all of them were put to very good use because
[Guest]: I had had a good primer you know I mean so I mean I was I handled it and people accepted
[Guest]: me they were good people they were nice people again I was not too it was not too problematic
[Guest]: for me to adjust to the new environment and there for the first time I handled assembly
[Guest]: elections on my own I created packages I created I got I developed a fascination for polo I
[Guest]: still keep in touch with a lot of my friends who played polo there and there was a bit
[Guest]: of royalty thing so then you know you just that rubbed off on you a little so I used
[Guest]: to bring out a monthly supplement called polo passion because polo was big so I mean I had
[Guest]: very generous colleagues I had a very generous resident editor initially he moved on he later
[Guest]: and then he I mean pretty much I was left to run the place you know and that was very
[Guest]: incredible of the people of people and there this whole again new thing there again I looked
[Guest]: at the language issue there I looked at oral histories because oral history was big and
[Guest]: so I looked at royalties I sort of made friends with some people like I mean I never thought
[Guest]: I'll meet the big man Bhairav Singh Shakawat but then I he took to me somehow you know
[Guest]: I mean I was pretty lucky about that and then I then one fine day I got a call from Delhi
[Guest]: and Outlook asking if I would like to run their south and the elections were coming
[Guest]: and 2004 is when I moved to the Outlook magazine and it was always by then you know I mean
[Guest]: my father had created this very lovely image of Vinod and the Sunday Observer and then
[Guest]: he used to tell me that he also edited a magazine which was not you know I mean a literary magazine
[Guest]: but it was a great magazine he would never tell me it was Debonair something would stop
[Guest]: him from telling me that it was so Sunday Observer I think he was very he had watched
[Guest]: it closely he had seen Outlook we had I still remember the sample issue of Outlook reaching
[Guest]: our home so we had seen all that and somewhere in the corner of my mind by then I had realized
[Guest]: that here is a great editor a great man who seems to be very liberal who gives you your
[Guest]: space and allows you to do your thing so if at all if it's possible I think I should work
[Guest]: with him one day and that dream came true in 2004 and I stayed with Vinod till the day
[Guest]: he retired so I mean I had a job offer and I went and told him and he said I'll walk
[Guest]: to the sunset stay with me until I'm there and he took eight months or one year to leave
[Guest]: so I had to keep that job with the Times of India in abeyance for that long and then I
[Guest]: came and took over as the editor-in-chief of Vijay Karnataka their biggest regional
[Guest]: paper which was making a lot of money but money yes but then it was completely on the
[Guest]: right so they wanted they had bought that paper from another person and they wanted
[Guest]: me to sort of bring it to the center make it more acceptable so that their intention
[Guest]: was to make it more commercially viable so that big advertisers come in for me it coincided
[Guest]: with my mission of making it centrist and making it more liberal so there was a kind
[Guest]: of thing together which is running parallel so I think I flourished there it was a real
[Guest]: big success so I did not have a problem again transiting from English to Canada because
[Guest]: I was anyway a bilingual and I was offered this job because I'm a bilingual but Outlook
[Guest]: was a great phase and Outlook became such a enormous thing because it turned me into
[Guest]: an investigative journalist it turned me into a political commentator and writer and I was
[Guest]: probably the only one to have this record I've written every single week in the magazine
[Guest]: since the day I joined and my very first piece was a cover story which is everybody here
[Guest]: I came to Karnataka again see the perspectives that you developed become so interesting that
[Guest]: I came to Karnataka for the 2004 elections so 2004 there was assembly and parliamentary
[Guest]: elections happening and I came here and everybody I met was saying Krishna is SM Krishna is
[Guest]: going to come back to power so I said okay TK you're saying this let me go and look around
[Guest]: so I went to the hinterlands I went to the different districts I traveled quite a bit
[Guest]: see Vinod was very liberal with all that you could just travel and he did not confine me
[Guest]: to Karnataka I was covering the entire south I could go anywhere I want I had to just write
[Guest]: this proposal and send it a give an interesting idea and then I had a very interesting and
[Guest]: a very fine editor who was the political editor was Mr. Ajit Pillai and Ajit Pillai and Vinod
[Guest]: Mehta Vinod himself describes him as a very dear colleague and so Ajit was not like other
[Guest]: editors in between your top man and you who would snatch your ideas and make it their
[Guest]: own and you know he was a he was a man with great rectitude and great moral bearing and
[Guest]: he encouraged me he whenever a great idea was there he would say don't worry I will
[Guest]: tell Vinod you travel because Vinod is busy I will tell him on Saturday or whatever you
[Guest]: travel it's okay I have given you the consent so initially you know that meant mattered
[Guest]: a lot although you were a senior guy and all that and there was the reporting structure
[Guest]: you always had to sort of convince Vinod through him and and once Vinod saw that he started
[Guest]: talking to me directly and of course Ajit would be looped in but we developed this bond
[Guest]: where Vinod knew I was a little stuck up kind of a character who would you know it was not
[Guest]: very comfortable speaking these small things of life but only speak of big ideas and big
[Guest]: things so whenever we had this arrangement where Vinod would call me every Saturday at
[Guest]: seven o'clock this was an you know I mean an editor of Vinod's stature having a contact
[Guest]: with his bureau head down south with this manner itself was a very interesting thing
[Guest]: so he used to call me at seven and he would never ask me what story you're doing he would
[Guest]: only say who's sleeping with who what is that happening what is that gossip that I hear
[Guest]: why is that fellow behaving like that is he sleeping with somebody you know I mean Vinod
[Guest]: was so much on the gossip side initially it shocked me I would say I mean I would all
[Guest]: all be ready to you know just tell him that this is happening sir that is happening next
[Guest]: week we should look at this and I think this is the the the idea that we pursued last time
[Guest]: is not really working but Vinod would lighten the whole thing he would not talk about ideas
[Guest]: at all and then when I tried to insert he would say no tell that to Ajit, Ajit will
[Guest]: take care of it don't worry you tell me the gossip so so so he would come here we would
[Guest]: have great time hopping bar hopping pubs and restaurants so the idea of an editor how I
[Guest]: should behave as an elder in the newsroom when I if and when I became an editor at that
[Guest]: time was again Vinod Mehta became a model he was he I mean a lot of people may have
[Guest]: a lot of stories to say but with me you know I mean I always got you know I mean a great
[Guest]: response from Vinod and he never curtailed me on anything in fact when I did the very
[Guest]: big story in 2005 on the Infosys land scam that was a big story when everybody was speaking
[Guest]: gaga about the Infosys and all that I knew that they were you know making putting making
[Guest]: petitions for more land and when when they had not actually used what was already with
[Guest]: them and they were making all these projections and all that and I wanted to do a story because
[Guest]: I had some documents and all that and it still not reached me but then I had seen them so
[Guest]: and there was this big debate that was happening in Karnataka as to why they are greedy after
[Guest]: land and all that so I suggested the idea and Vinod said yeah go ahead no problem so
[Guest]: I wrote this story and then he called me on a Wednesday he said are you sure of all that
[Guest]: you've written because by then he had started getting calls from various quarters saying
[Guest]: somebody had leaked that this story is happening and he said I've been getting calls are you
[Guest]: sure of what you've written I said yes sir then he would insist that I call him Vinod
[Guest]: but then I would never say I could never do it so I yes I said I'm pretty sure I've checked
[Guest]: looked up my facts and all that he said do you have doc do you have the documents which
[Guest]: support all that you're saying I said sir I have seen all of it this person has promised
[Guest]: that he'll give it to me on a Friday but he said but we go to press on the Thursday or
[Guest]: your form is going to the press on Thursday how what we what shall we do you know I mean
[Guest]: if you're going to get the documents on Friday have you seen it are you very sure are you
[Guest]: bakka and this is my first year in Outlook 2005 I said sir I'm pretty much sure it was
[Guest]: yeah second year in Outlook 2004 I joined so he said okay then okay I'll run it because
[Guest]: he sort of gave himself this reason he said too many people are calling so it must be
[Guest]: correct Wow superb he said too many are calling it must be correct we go down we go down together
[Guest]: don't worry I'll run it it was a five page thing it's just went on the thing and that
[Guest]: was a great moment and then on a Friday I got all the documents I just faxed them to
[Guest]: Ajit and I said I've got everything so nothing to worry and then again Saturday the call
[Guest]: comes at seven o'clock and he is laughing and he said have we restored the balance I
[Guest]: said yes sir so he said everything is quiet and silent and people are appreciating what
[Guest]: you have written so it must be true it is correct so he said don't stop with this story
[Guest]: it has done well so do two more let's make it a series so I started scrambling for more
[Guest]: documents and then I realized that SM Krishna had preferential shares in Infosys then I
[Guest]: realized that his son-in-law who I mean drowned himself again had dealt with I mean had underwritten
[Guest]: the Infosys IPO and there was a great deal of involvement between these two and then
[Guest]: Krishna had accommodated a lot of Infosys people in his administration you know urban
[Guest]: infrastructure airport so there was a lot of conflict of interest so I wrote that and
[Guest]: then of course I at that point of time Mr. Mohandas Pai was still part of Infosys and
[Guest]: then he said I want to meet I said I'll come to your office and then I can never forget
[Guest]: that conversation that happened between him and me and I said I stand by what I write
[Guest]: so then they sent a kind of rejoinder to my piece and at the end of the last line was
[Guest]: this is only for your understanding not to print so I still keep that percent from one
[Guest]: of the PR people so that story was not contested so it was great so that was sort of give confidence
[Guest]: to Vinod and that led to my big even bigger story that is the breaking of the mining scam
[Guest]: in Pallari so we went with the headline the Reddy Republic when even when the world had
[Guest]: not woken up to anything like that the Loka Yukta had not woken up and the first criminal
[Guest]: defamation case by the Reddy's the notorious Reddy's who finally got jailed was filed against
[Guest]: Vinod Mehta and me the very first criminal defamation case so we felt vindicated after
[Guest]: that also was proved but in between all of this Vinod knew that I was this I was my feature
[Guest]: side was also very good not just the political and the other side and this SM Krishna thing
[Guest]: when I came to Karnataka the first time the cover story that I first did I went around
[Guest]: and I realized Krishna is losing I got a sense that this man is not going to come I wrote
[Guest]: that Vinod published it he said Krishna and the covers cover was Krishna's photograph
[Guest]: and Naidu's photograph and Krishna had a red light there and I had explained why Krishna
[Guest]: may not come back and it turned out to be correct because although Krishna was very unhappy with
[Guest]: what I had written and they sort of somebody from his side called me and they spoke badly
[Guest]: I didn't really worry too much but that turned out to be correct so I think you know we journalists
[Guest]: or reporters have to convince their writer editors not by taking fancy ideas to them
[Guest]: but actually doing these stories and those stories turning out to be correct and that
[Guest]: builds a relationship with your editor so he impulsively trusts what you're trying to
[Guest]: tell him or trying to you know I mean the ideas that you're trying to give him and then
[Guest]: he gives you a so finally it became an outlook or Sugata's what's true a story you would
[Guest]: not even ask what it is you say okay one page enough two page enough it came down to that
[Guest]: so you felt very happy and in between something very big happened which is the 10th anniversary
[Guest]: of Outlook and I was made I was officially made the historian of Outlook so I wrote this
[Guest]: longest essay I think the only competitor I had in Outlook was Arundhati Roy it was
[Guest]: as long an essay as that which is titled the history of Outlook in ten and a half chapters
[Guest]: it was ten years of Outlook and I begin with I mean I'd asked Julian Barnes to I thought
[Guest]: of him when he told me that I'd asked him for a it was an eponymous title of course
[Guest]: I'd asked him for a quote or something he had said I'm too busy or something I start
[Guest]: with that and then I this went on and then for that 10th anniversary issue I sort of
[Guest]: all my exposure to the to England and all that had came good because one is of course
[Guest]: Julian Barnes which is incidental but then I interviewed Harold Evans I interviewed
[Guest]: Shyam Lal the great Times of India's editor I mean I think I had a lot of pages in that
[Guest]: you know the biggest essay was mine the cover story was mine and that was a very momentous
[Guest]: occasion because it was ten years of Outlook an alternate magazine to India today had survived
[Guest]: and Vinod was at his peak and when there was this party that was organized to celebrate
[Guest]: in the evening so Vinod came looking for me he held my hand took me to Rajan Raheja the
[Guest]: owner and he said he's the one who's written the history of Outlook and that was my finest
[Guest]: moment Amit because you know I mean you always dreamt of Vinod Mehta and working for Vinod
[Guest]: Mehta and here was a moment when he sort of you know I mean said well done and Vinod was
[Guest]: very stingy with praise he would only say well done that's all and you had to even his
[Guest]: appraisal letters used to be so very you know in increment letters used to be so very tighted
[Guest]: just two lines and then he would if he really wanted to say that he meant it he would call
[Guest]: and you would say well done well done keep it up keep it up that's all if he says I would
[Guest]: tell my wife he said keep it up twice so which means he's trying to emphasize that thing
[Guest]: so I used to be so alert to his phone calls the great man and he did not make he also
[Guest]: taught me about financial probity he never made money he never you know built farmhouses
[Guest]: and he did not sort of you know go on transatlantic trips and he did not like going to going and
[Guest]: staying in five-star hotels used to come here and used to say he take me to some dosa place
[Guest]: that corner thing that you took me last time on the footpath it was that kind of a so that
[Guest]: taught me a lot of lessons without actually besides journalism of course besides the great
[Guest]: journalism that he allowed us to do and that was it was a it was a he was living the role
[Guest]: that I you know when I had imagined and it was a great it was a great great time for
[Guest]: me when I I think I mean I used to then I when I became an editor I was trying to imitate
[Guest]: Vinod many times trying to be accommodative trying to allow ideas to come inside the newsroom
[Guest]: I brought in this practice of asking the junior most you know we had a panel you know the
[Guest]: junior most in the newsroom should come and sit in the news meeting not just the seniors
[Guest]: and they would absorb they could speak and I made this rule that the best idea wins not
[Guest]: the senior who speaks you know does not get space it is the best idea that wins and these
[Guest]: things you know I mean it was a very nice little cushy ride for the for three years
[Guest]: and the Times of India's Vijay Karnataka and then of course Modi happened so that started
[Guest]: disrupting things because I think they started orienting themselves differently and I was
[Guest]: inconvenient although I had critical and commercial success the papers number we had touched a
[Guest]: readership of nearly 8 million readership you know it's not very unnatural for a regional
[Guest]: paper but it was huge for a Kannada paper because the market was a very small market
[Guest]: for various historical reasons and it had expanded and the circulation had gone up revenues
[Guest]: were good we were all being taken you know annual holidays to foreign countries so it
[Guest]: was all very good until what he happened and that I think is a statement.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a question that struck me has there been a time where it's Saturday and it's 7
[Amit Varma]: p.m. and you're missing Vinod because that's a time he used to call?
[Guest]: Initially yes I think you know I mean I was but also that seven o'clock call stopped after
[Guest]: Vinod retired and I moved on and I started editing a Kannada beast called Vijay Karnataka
[Guest]: and then of course I was then I mean yeah I think he passed away when I was with the
[Guest]: Asianet whatever so that had broken in a way but then you know the mental association and
[Guest]: I mean I always wanted to report back to Vinod saying that I have done this so that was always
[Guest]: the basic thing you know I mean so if I'd got a if my newspaper broke a big story or
[Guest]: if when I got a guy to sort of do something very interesting I just always felt that I
[Guest]: should tell him and I would occasionally call him you know because it was also a kind of
[Guest]: relationship where you know he's a very big man and he used to appear on television channels
[Guest]: and used to be very busy also he kept himself very busy he was editorial chairman but then
[Guest]: he used to still attend office and all that I would and it became a little complicated
[Guest]: with others around and all that I didn't want to sort of cannibalize on his time and also
[Guest]: but I would occasionally call him up and tell him that I wanted to tell you this and very
[Guest]: briefly tell him that and my conversations on the phone are very formal so you know it's
[Guest]: another thing when I'm sitting in front of him I can confess I can speak I can tell him
[Guest]: that this happened so there were a few couple of occasions where I told him about the problems
[Guest]: that I'm having in the newsroom and all that and he gave me some wonderful advice and when
[Guest]: his Rahul when the Sanjay Gandhi biography got reprinted I was the editor in editor of
[Guest]: Vijay Karnataka and he called me up and he said this has got reprinted and somebody in
[Guest]: Bangalore wants to organize a launch function at the Taj so will you be in conversation
[Guest]: with me so I was mighty pleased you know I mean you know asking me to be in conversation
[Guest]: with him and so I did that so I mean I so that that point I felt that there was this
[Guest]: kind of it was reciprocal you know he was seeing me as someone whom he could sort of
[Guest]: as some kind of a there was an emotional linkage so he never let it out but then it would always
[Guest]: be there so so that made me very happy and then of course I read some initial pages from
[Guest]: Lucknow boy and all that and he was very excited about that he would talk about it and then
[Guest]: I he asked me when somebody wanted to get it translated into Kannada so after it got
[Guest]: published and it was a roaring success so that somebody had directly approached him
[Guest]: so then he said he told them very very very nice of him to say that he said that will
[Guest]: be decided by Sugata so so then it became imperative and obligatory on me to sort of
[Guest]: quickly fix up a translator but of course he did not live to see the translation which
[Guest]: came out really beautifully in Kannada the Lucknow boys in Kannada as well so I mean
[Guest]: of course I Sumita Mehta was there and she was very kind to give permission to the book
[Guest]: and it came out in Kannada and it was a big success in Kannada as well so this was Vinod
[Guest]: and the kind of bonding and you know I mean I remember a line from William Shon's a
[Guest]: book on William Shon written by Ved Mehta and that's a one of the one of the books
[Guest]: that I really love reading because William Shon I always thought was a character like
[Guest]: Vinod Mehta and I always used to tell Ajit that Ajit you have to write a book and it
[Guest]: should be called Vinod Mehta's outlook like William Shon's New Yorker so Ajit of course
[Guest]: Ajit wrote a lovely book on journalism which did well Hachette published it it was called
[Guest]: off the record it was full of stories and his lovely interaction with Vinod and Vinod
[Guest]: wrote the foreword for that book as well and that's where he said that Ajit Pillai would
[Guest]: have thrived even without me he was a great reporter whom I sort of had the joy of having
[Guest]: in my newsroom so that was the humility of the man as well so he taught us to extend
[Guest]: that kind of courtesies to others you know if you are under a great man and a good man
[Guest]: he teaches you a lot of these things and and very indirectly without without being didactic
[Guest]: and instructive so so that so William Shon I was telling you about William Shon and Ved
[Guest]: Mehta so there's a line there which struck me when I was reading it and this was around
[Guest]: the time when Vinod was still alive and I was to do this introduction and conversation
[Guest]: on the Sanjay Gandhi book so I was preparing myself and I wanted to impress him and I took
[Guest]: this line from that book and I and it said that whoever I mean I sort of became emotionally
[Guest]: attached to I saw them as my father that's that's some something like that I'm not quoting
[Guest]: verbatim so he's here met William Shon and he's given him a job in New Yorker and is
[Guest]: nurturing his talent and he says you know you I developed that what he meant was that
[Guest]: I developed that kind of kinship relationship with him so whoever sort of they became my
[Guest]: kind of father figures or whatever so I use that for Vinod and I'm very very happy that
[Guest]: I used it and he heard it and he never responded he did not say anything and Vinod Vinod did
[Guest]: not say anything that meant that he has registered on him Vinod did not have children of course
[Guest]: he speaks about a girl he sort of may have fathered and must be living somewhere in Europe
[Guest]: in his Lucknow boy but Vinod did not have children and I always was curious what he
[Guest]: thought of people like us who were bordering on almost worship you know when we literally
[Guest]: worship not mean worship was not the bhakt kind of worship but that genuine respect for
[Guest]: his integrity which is very very rare in journalism that financial probity that see I went to
[Guest]: cover the crash in Mangalore air crash okay I went there and I took the first flight and
[Guest]: landed there and I wrote a story and I sent it to Outlook and I was supposed to come back
[Guest]: and then you know usually the arrangement in Outlook was that you got the ticket from
[Guest]: Delhi you went there and then I had to tell them when I'm returning and they would send
[Guest]: me another ticket and this smart Alec kind of a MBA person someone sitting in the in
[Guest]: the marketing office or the the business office I sent a note saying that I'm supposed to
[Guest]: return on such and such a day so please send me a ticket and all that and we had done mortuary
[Guest]: visits for three days continuously and the scene was so bad I write in my story that
[Guest]: we went to report but we were actually asked to help so we had to pull out people we had
[Guest]: to sort of help people identify so you became part of something else you know you went to
[Guest]: report and it was a very traumatic experience you know I mean you can't see charred bodies
[Guest]: like that and be normal and it was all over in those mortuaries and we had done that for
[Guest]: three days me and the photographer and I wrote for air tickets back to Bangalore and this
[Guest]: fellow says oh the air tickets are very expensive you take a bus back I was furious I asked
[Guest]: him who told you to deny me an air ticket I mean I was a senior editor I was already
[Guest]: an associate editor with Outlook he said no no no we have a the CEO or somebody has said
[Guest]: that you know the air tickets are it's it's a bad time for the organization so we have
[Guest]: to sort of cut costs so we can't send you the ticket so sitting on the pavement there
[Guest]: of a mortuary and I had a luxury of a blackberry those days and I was had this fancy instrument
[Guest]: and I wrote on my blackberry to Vinod Mehta directly saying I have done these many things
[Guest]: I have filed my story I have done these mortuary visits I'm exhausted I'm broken in some sense
[Guest]: and when I write for what is my legitimate thing for a ticket to go back to Bangalore
[Guest]: I am told to take a bus this is how you treat your journalists so you know I wrote that
[Guest]: I sent it and I was so furious I usually am a very calm collected kind of I don't do it
[Guest]: I was very unhappy because you know I think those deaths and those the environment was
[Guest]: so bad and I got an immediate response on the mail Vinod said I'm very sorry it has
[Guest]: happened without my knowledge I'll ensure that the ticket comes to you I mean which
[Guest]: editor on earth of that stature of that kind of thing would say a sorry to a ordinary you
[Guest]: know person you know like me a person reporting from some corner of India so that that again
[Guest]: was a life lesson he was like Vivek Mehta you know made William Shawn established a
[Guest]: kinship relationship with him it happened with me also I have to confess it happened
[Guest]: with me also and by then my father was dead my father was gone and I was hurriedly looking
[Guest]: to substitute you know I mean people and then Vinod came like that so it was a very special
[Guest]: bond it is that bond exists with Vinod that bond exists with Jeremy Seabrook I think there
[Guest]: are two people who sort of I don't I wouldn't say they replaced my father or whatever like
[Guest]: that but then you extend those kind of that kind of relationship and have that relationship
[Guest]: and extend those courtesies and those respects to these two people so they were Vinod I mean
[Guest]: more than Vinod it was Jeremy because Jeremy got involved I mean with the I mean with the
[Guest]: family in the sense he was he was very he would understand try to understand what's
[Guest]: happening in my family what's happening with my children he would talk to my wife for long
[Guest]: hours talk to my children would counsel them he would speak to them so he developed a very
[Guest]: different kind of bond Vinod could not shake off that thing it was a limited thing but
[Guest]: he had a connect with my wife too in a sense he would speak to her would he would ask her
[Guest]: a few things when he came here he would be very particular he would tell bring her for
[Guest]: dinner when we sort of meet in Bangalore when we went to Delhi to call on him what was he
[Guest]: would be very gracious but Jeremy was at a different level but then you exit this Vedmahata
[Guest]: thing I quoted just to say that it happens with all of us that people who are you always
[Guest]: want to sort of extend the kinship relationship you see somebody as your mother who's not
[Guest]: your biological mother you see somebody as your father because he's been nice and not
[Guest]: not a patriarch but then someone who has nurtured you who sort of you know sheltered you what
[Guest]: was been who's made you feel very special was you know advanced your career without
[Guest]: putting themselves before you know a lot of such things so I always remember that line
[Guest]: from William Shawn's I mean Vedmahata's book on William Shawn a great book you know I don't
[Guest]: still have a copy I read it with some I borrowed somebody's copy and then I have a Kindle version
[Guest]: of it so I mean I still have not been able to get a hard copy which I will I hope to
[Guest]: buy someday and just keep it there for myself so that was Vinod Mehta so that was the kind
[Guest]: of liberal journalistic newsroom he built he sustained and he allowed a lot of people
[Guest]: to thrive and I should say he spoiled us all because after that working anywhere was a
[Guest]: very claustrophobic experience because there was I'm sure Vinod had to deal with his owners
[Guest]: and when I had to deal with my owners directly there was no filter right there was no this
[Guest]: man protecting your interests and arguing for your sake getting you money and increments
[Guest]: and things to travel and all that so he was I mean I missed him and when I started and
[Guest]: then the buck stopped at my table as an editor I used to be as careful and generous trying
[Guest]: to be probably I would in with whatever limitations that was there you know the first thing when
[Guest]: I went to Vijay Karnataka I realized that I something this is something that Binal Pandey
[Guest]: also told you on your show the other day I realized that the salaries were pathetic of
[Guest]: people who were stringers and refusal correspondents so the first thing the first big argument
[Guest]: I made was there should be a parity and there should be a kind of structure that everybody
[Guest]: sort of knows what they're trying to get or will get or whatever so that happened times
[Guest]: was times that have bought that argument and they were quite happy to sort of I would tell
[Guest]: them that you're such a big organization I don't think your employee should go out and
[Guest]: say that we're not paid well and if you're not paid if a journalist is not paid well
[Guest]: and if he has a family to run he'll always look for avenues to make supplementary incomes
[Guest]: and that's when the politician comes into the picture so he'll try to push something
[Guest]: else so let us say try and make it as reasonable as possible and they responded positively
[Guest]: to that that whole argument and that happened and then I sort of also sort of I was did
[Guest]: not want to look very moralistic or you know having come from the English spear and I knew
[Guest]: that you know it was a world of a difference and people were not acclimatized to here so
[Guest]: I would sort of very gently bring them around and get them to see my point of view and I
[Guest]: would tell them that if you make innocent mistakes I will be the first one to pardon
[Guest]: you but if you make deliberate mistakes then I'll kick you out you know I mean I cannot
[Guest]: tolerate corruption because there was this problem that it still is there in Canada which
[Guest]: is the problem of rampant financial corruption inside newsrooms you know journalists and
[Guest]: others they sort of find ways to sort of corrupt journalists and there was a history to that
[Guest]: paper also and it was completely on the right and those arguments had to be neutralized
[Guest]: made more balanced made to look more like journalism and I had to I mean they all sort
[Guest]: of mean it's also very nice that people when you speak to them the way you speak matters
[Guest]: a great deal and my colleagues never gave me a problem they sort of care it was the
[Guest]: marketing fellows and the circulation fellows who would come and tell no no no this we need
[Guest]: to put more of this to sell more but I think journalists started seeing this whole joy
[Guest]: of doing a great story and the natural reaction that it evokes you know we did so many human
[Guest]: interest stories and that they saw the whole thing changing so I was I used to tell them
[Guest]: the next day that this is the power of good journalism see this has changed something
[Guest]: I still remember there was the story of a Muslim girl who had been treated I mean incorrectly
[Guest]: in a government hospital and she had been paralyzed and her father was a poor Muslim
[Guest]: guy who ran a workshop somewhere and he had to sell his I think house or pledge it or
[Guest]: something like that and he was in debt and for a mistake that he had not committed it
[Guest]: was a simple problem he took her to this hospital a government hospital a children's hospital
[Guest]: and they gave her wrong medicine and it had all reacted and she had become paralyzed for life
[Guest]: and he was running from pillar to post meeting ministers in a congress government who are
[Guest]: Muslims and they were not helping him they were not sort of doing anything and then we
[Guest]: were getting furious because he came and met one of my reporters and that reporter sort
[Guest]: of did not tell us in the newsroom that there was this big story to be done but we somehow
[Guest]: you know one of the chiefs one of his immediate seniors sort of recognized that there was
[Guest]: something happening and then he said he suddenly raised the issue in the meeting and I and
[Guest]: he said there must be a I think there's a great story there that that father has been
[Guest]: coming and eating his head so there must be a story I think we can do a human interest
[Guest]: story or something like that so I mean I was trying to humanize the newspaper as much as
[Guest]: possible so I asked what this story was then they narrated this whole thing then I said
[Guest]: instinctively I said check up the chief minister's relief fund and see who has been given money
[Guest]: from the chief minister's relief fund if this child does not deserve money then who else
[Guest]: deserves money from the government check up all this you know I mean the chief minister
[Guest]: gives doles right to all these people so by evening my reporters had done a fantastic
[Guest]: job they came back to me and they said sir you will be shocked one very big Kannada writer
[Guest]: is being paid for his dialysis he was a former vice-chancellor he was a former chancellor
[Guest]: former sitting chancellor former vice-chancellor and he has enough money he has a house in
[Guest]: Bangalore he has a house in Mysore he has a farmhouse and he's being given money for
[Guest]: his dialysis and his whole thing I mean I'm deliberately withholding the name so he is
[Guest]: being given this money so but the child is being denied this child is a poem and we have
[Guest]: been putting this whole story on the front page and the government is not responding
[Guest]: so I said just contrast that and write a story so that went on the front page and all hell
[Guest]: broke loose this writer who was also a friend of my father would come for his funeral called
[Guest]: me and he and he sort of literally abused me and he said I'm sending you a note now
[Guest]: and you do whatever you want and I'm it's not my problem if the government gives me
[Guest]: money I mean I am in you don't know you're killing me you know what will happen if I
[Guest]: see he was in serious medical condition but you know in the government is there for people
[Guest]: like the little girl who is and she has committed no mistake it is she went to your institution
[Guest]: and you have crippled her and here is a writer who can afford his costs and you're sort of
[Guest]: you know pandering him and so he told me that it's not just this chief minister who gave
[Guest]: me money the previous Eduard Appa also gave me money the other fellow also gave me money
[Guest]: I said are you willing to sort of put all this on mail to me I will sort of carry your
[Guest]: version so he sort of sent his version and I think he must have written it in complete
[Guest]: he was in it was angry and he must have written it in his angry mood and that had some details
[Guest]: which exposed him further so I just published that letter also and that sort of created
[Guest]: such a buzz I'm just giving you one example of a story and how systems work unfairly and
[Guest]: if you just decide to sort of do a little bit it sort of works to the benefits of the
[Guest]: child had of course the child got some aid and all that but it exposed the system and
[Guest]: it was a Congress government that was in power and this man had taken money from the Congress
[Guest]: government the previous BJP government from Eduard Appa from everybody and I think it
[Guest]: was a habit that had been formed that if I am a great writer I have sort of you know
[Guest]: contributed to the culture of the state so I need to be taken care of that was a an attitude
[Guest]: which I never sort of accepted and it is the same writers and same journalists in Karnataka
[Guest]: who sort of protected this kind of an environment who took free sites from government you know
[Guest]: they were called G category sites so SM Krishna distributed it all these people distributed
[Guest]: all the all the chief ministers have done that it finally when it went to the high court
[Guest]: it got state I mean so they were distributing this largest giving them benefits giving them
[Guest]: discounted whatever some people took two sides so that they could sell one and build a house
[Guest]: on the other one this is this this is I am speaking about G category sites in Karnataka
[Guest]: this was journalism and of course communalism and was on the other side it was sort of on
[Guest]: the rise and paper that I edited sort of had made it its ideological duty to sort of promote
[Guest]: a certain kind of polarization and it started with that I'm sorry to say it started with
[Guest]: that and corruption was another element so there were and so we today when we talk about
[Guest]: the media Amit we say oh it's all gone bad today it's gone back gone bad yesterday oh
[Guest]: it was not like this I'm sorry it was I think there were always people like this if you
[Guest]: look at the emergency and the Indian media I'm working on a book on emergency and the
[Guest]: Indian-American diaspora I'll be going to the US to research shortly they're full of
[Guest]: examples of how media compromised how people sort of board how people sort of did not stand
[Guest]: up for what was correct so I mean I mean I am not shocked by what we are seeing today
[Guest]: the mainstream media so today we have Twitter and Facebook where we sort of amplify the
[Guest]: whole problem but tell me all these senior editors who are in my book on Devya Gowda
[Guest]: I speak about Ramkrishna Hegde and the people he cultivated people who did not belong to
[Guest]: the state were given sites in the state and they were all big editors in Delhi and he
[Guest]: was creating a lobby for himself in Delhi hoping that you know they will support him
[Guest]: and they'll prop him up when the time comes but you know I mean Devya Gowda's destiny
[Guest]: was something else so he got he became the Prime Minister not Mr. Hegde and Hegde was
[Guest]: covering up all his corruption that was happening here with his kind of you know many things
[Guest]: that were he could manage through public relations in Delhi so lobbies and cocktail circuits
[Guest]: and moulding of opinion in cocktail circuits and the anglophone elite and the absence of
[Guest]: understanding of the real India all of this has been true even three decades four decades
[Guest]: ago and it's true today as well I think today we are far far far more aware of the problems
[Guest]: than that existed then because they were just small little institutions tucked away nobody
[Guest]: looked at them seriously now anything you do there are hundreds of people attacking
[Guest]: you there are trolls and there are people who question you so I think we are in I mean
[Guest]: I agree with you that we are in a slightly better situation now not in a worse situation
[Guest]: because we are aware far more aware of the problems that confront us and have sort of
[Guest]: put us in this kind of a condition and the other issue is of newsrooms is of diversity
[Guest]: nobody speaks about it and you know I mean I try to correct the situation as much as
[Guest]: possible I try to create a kind of rainbow or newsroom where people from the backward
[Guest]: classes Dalits I appointed a Delhi bureau chief who was a Dalit I had a chief photographer
[Guest]: who was a Dalit I made chief sub-editors I mean I'd consciously mix the castes because
[Guest]: you know I mean without your knowledge or without your knowledge with or without your
[Guest]: knowledge your worldviews that have that you've inherited unconsciously now not many people
[Guest]: are cruel deliberately it's an unconscious kind of a thing they come in with those prejudices
[Guest]: and that gets perpetrated so when you're reporting when you're when you're a medium that is sort
[Guest]: of holding a mirror to the society and you are writing it from a certain perspective
[Guest]: without even caring so that's where I remember Lankesh who asked do you have a Muslim friend
[Guest]: do you have a Christian friend go and make a Muslim friend you will learn much more about
[Guest]: society than actually reading 10 books on Tolstoy or Dostoevsky that was a great thing
[Guest]: right so so here diversity is still a very big issue in Indian newsrooms it's largely
[Guest]: upper caste it's largely men women have slowly sort of made some kind of thing because because
[Guest]: of television mostly because of the screen and the and I don't know how much of control
[Guest]: they have over what gets in or what gets out but then at least there are you see women
[Guest]: because it's it's a visual thing right so diversity has been a big issue and I think
[Guest]: if we don't solve that all this idea of India bankum that we keep speaking about will not
[Guest]: get resolved because you don't have people in centers of communication who can pick up
[Guest]: those ideas real diversity thing see lots of leaders in India we talk so much about
[Guest]: Nehru why is it that we speak so little about a Morarji was he an outright kind of some
[Guest]: buffoon no you know if you study Morarji if you read as a three volumes of Macmillan autobiography
[Guest]: I mean my respect went up for the man you know I mean he was see you're condemned for
[Guest]: one little thing and you're typecast you look at Jagjivan Ram who never succeeded it was
[Guest]: a great administrator please know that he was a great administrator Devraj Harris was
[Guest]: never celebrated is the man who gave you the idea of backward class reservation even before
[Guest]: Mandal was commissioned during the Janata party regime he was the one who you know very
[Guest]: innovatively made use of emergency to implement a lot of progressive policies in Karnataka
[Guest]: and therefore came back to power when everybody lost when Congress lost everywhere he came
[Guest]: back with a far improved margin and a far improved number so that is something that
[Guest]: is because we don't have people who are sensitive to these see it doesn't happen in the American
[Guest]: newsroom it is there the problem exists it exists everywhere there is a certain class
[Guest]: and a certain caste or a certain set of people who sort of dominate environments but at least
[Guest]: that consciousness has to grow inside you that we have to make our newsrooms diverse
[Guest]: we have to sort of get people from all shades to come in in this mandalization of politics
[Guest]: we speak so much about but the same politicians who benefited from the mandalization process
[Guest]: are so bad about advocating these kind of causes so they've actually sabotaged their
[Guest]: own revolution so I mean they have made it Parivarwad and all that is a separate issue
[Guest]: but they never have advocated the kind of things that one needs to and diversity is
[Guest]: at the center of Indian journalism and the center of Indian media and until unless you
[Guest]: learn to accommodate different kinds of people in your newsroom you will not be doing justice
[Guest]: to the idea of India or diversity of India or its multilingual heritage or the various
[Guest]: world views that are around us you will just never get closer to reality.
[Amit Varma]: I remember reading this great book one of the best books I've read in the last decade
[Amit Varma]: by Philip Tetlockal, Super Forecasting and I came across a study in that which shows
[Amit Varma]: that the best indicator of the quality of decision making is not intelligence is not
[Amit Varma]: education it is diversity that the more diverse a group of people the better the decisions
[Amit Varma]: you will get which is like the study showed it to be empirical fact you can argue about
[Amit Varma]: why it is the case I think why it is the case would be that you have so many different viewpoints
[Amit Varma]: that you are less likely to make mistakes and more likely to see things in a new way
[Amit Varma]: and therefore I actually think that this is not even something that you know regardless
[Amit Varma]: of whether it is mandated or not a good editor will try to voluntarily bring about this diversity
[Amit Varma]: like you said you did like I think if I was running a firm not just a journalism this
[Amit Varma]: thing but any firm out of pure self-interest the policy I'd put in place is that every
[Amit Varma]: time there are multiple equal candidates for a job multiple equal candidates I'll pick
[Amit Varma]: the one who increases the diversity right once you meet a certain you know whatever
[Amit Varma]: the requirement kind of is I want to sort of let's talk about journalism because on
[Amit Varma]: the one hand I you know in all my time in journalism as well it's just so it's always
[Amit Varma]: been incredibly mediocre but on one margin I think it's become worse today and and I've
[Amit Varma]: been thinking about this a bit that on the one hand you have sort of on the one hand
[Amit Varma]: you have media that's clearly sold out and it's because of carrot and stick you know
[Amit Varma]: so many media houses depend on government advertising and that's a carrot the threat
[Amit Varma]: of taking it away is a stick and then you have the stick that any media house that has
[Amit Varma]: any other business interest you are going to get raided your chemical factory can be
[Amit Varma]: shut down and so on so on the one hand you have a lot of media which is completely blind
[Amit Varma]: like in Indira's time it was said that you know they were asked to bend and they chose
[Amit Varma]: to crawl and if there's a similar thing and on the other hand you have a bunch of brave
[Amit Varma]: outliers like the News Minute and News Laundry, Wire, Scroll etc who you know Dhanaya Rajendran
[Amit Varma]: of News Laundry recently put out of News Minute recently put out these tweets about how you
[Amit Varma]: know they had been raided and the whole thing went on for years and the process is a punishment
[Amit Varma]: but they stuck through it and it seems to me that while one group of people who sold
[Amit Varma]: out are not fulfilling the basic duties of journalism another group of people are having
[Amit Varma]: to go way beyond what should be reasonably expected of journalists in a sense to do good
[Amit Varma]: journalism to continue to do good journalism they are almost being forced to turn into
[Amit Varma]: crusaders that it is not possible anymore as a matter of course to do good journalism
[Amit Varma]: what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: So it's a situation is very grave what the picture that you painted is not incorrect
[Guest]: at all see there are larger issues like diversity and all that but then this kind of vindictiveness
[Guest]: of people who are not ideologically aligned to you is something which is it's becoming
[Guest]: so very obvious ideologically or you know I mean who presented alternate point of view
[Guest]: forget ideology, ideology is a very big word so that is becoming very obvious but that
[Guest]: is the reason why you know we also have to start thinking about how we structure news
[Guest]: organizations or what is the business model or how do we sort of incorporate a company
[Guest]: and what should see there has to be some kind of legislative intervention as soon as possible
[Guest]: or as and when it is possible where crossholding should be banned you know I mean your crossholdings
[Guest]: and all of that also create a lot of problems because you are automatically making yourself
[Guest]: liable right so you are a businessman you're doing this you're also using see this all
[Guest]: of this started when you started using your business your journalism to leverage for your
[Guest]: business interests see it is not innocent on the other side also right it is not just
[Guest]: journalists who have started these tuta puta small little digital organizations my sympathies
[Guest]: are entirely with them and I am I mean following their work and I also write for them occasionally
[Guest]: but the problem is the other people who were supposedly upholders of this institutional
[Guest]: journalism started leveraging journalism for other things you know they had to extend their
[Guest]: plant or they had to do something new license had to be got or they had to import something
[Guest]: you know I mean I hear ridiculous stories when I go to Delhi from my friends who would
[Guest]: be panicking and then I tell them calm down let's have another drink or you can go later
[Guest]: no no no madam had called or sir had called they are having some function and the road
[Guest]: has not been asphalted properly I think I need to speak to somebody and just ensure
[Guest]: that it is done so this and they hold big conclaves in Delhi and then you have to get
[Guest]: guests and you have to get guests you have to sort of use your public relation so journalists
[Guest]: have become so many things rolled into one public relations experts and people who speak
[Guest]: to the local municipality to get roads asphalted and you know I mean of course you know checking
[Guest]: on the application of your daughter or granddaughter or grandson in the passport office and then
[Guest]: putting in a word I mean this is ridiculous and it's gone to that level and it is not
[Guest]: that it's not again a problem that happened on the other side the government the government
[Guest]: realized that they are vulnerable and they started there is somebody who came some smart
[Guest]: fellow came in 2014 and he thought he could exploit them for that the earlier regime for
[Guest]: was see I always say this about the Congress regimes which is the guilt of the emergencies
[Guest]: put on them so much that they at least have a little you know I mean qualms about you
[Guest]: know doing something with the media in a manner that will set deepen the kind of distrust
[Guest]: about them so the Chidambaram did get Raju Nari Setty out of India so all of that these
[Guest]: are stories that get you know come back in a different I didn't say that you said it
[Guest]: yeah so they come back in a different context they get so we have seen again what happened
[Guest]: with Bobby Ghosh and all of that is true and all of that is very real and I mean in my
[Guest]: own it is autobiographical for me I could not stay in a newsroom because I had to once
[Guest]: I realized that I had to make too many compromises I said let me keep the relationship and move
[Guest]: out and I just moved out this is I mean I both with the times then I moved to the Asianet
[Guest]: where I was looking after a very big old Kannada newspaper and also running television channels
[Guest]: and then I mean I realized that you know I mean I was just not fitting into the whole
[Guest]: thing it is see you're not asked to it doesn't at least in in my experience you are not asked
[Guest]: to leave or you're not told on your face but then the situation is made so uncomfortable
[Guest]: that then if you have some self-respect left in you you would say let me sort of step down
[Guest]: and let them continue in the way they want to so that's exactly what happened with me
[Guest]: and then I went and started a digital thing you know which is the first of its kind with
[Guest]: podcasting, video, multiple thing you know interwoven thing and that also had to sort
[Guest]: of wind up because the people who had funded me their names appeared in the paradise papers
[Guest]: and then you know I mean I think they became squeamish about it and they withdrew the funding
[Guest]: so then I decided writing is the best thing for some time because the atmosphere is not
[Guest]: conducive for you to sort of pursue your journalism so I stood I mean at least I had writing to
[Guest]: save me and I had some you know I mean I had I didn't have to worry about a house to live
[Guest]: in so I sort of you know but that is not the case with everybody right people I mean I
[Guest]: understand and I'm completely respect if people have to stay back in newsrooms because they
[Guest]: have to run families they have to support families they have to you know support their
[Guest]: children's education I can understand that I was slightly older and I had worked in senior
[Guest]: positions and made relatively more money which sustains me for a longer period it's not that
[Guest]: it can sustain me forever but and also there is this you know you're this thing idealistic
[Guest]: and as I said little magazines were showcases of idealism Plimpton obituary you know it
[Guest]: said this beautiful line in Boston Globe showcases of idealism so similarly you know you also
[Guest]: have this value system which has been ingrained in you and you want to live up to that and
[Guest]: you feel that your conscience is pricking and your answer answering your people you
[Guest]: love who have sort of invested so much of trust and love and affection in you and they
[Guest]: thought you'll never violate that so you are you're actually the moral you know quandary
[Guest]: and that you're put into it is so stressful it's so stressful it is so difficult to negotiate
[Guest]: that moral quandary and I think that is the biggest punishment it is not losing a job
[Guest]: it is not having to leave a place it's not about making money it's about how do you answer
[Guest]: your conscience how do you sort of navigate that delicate thing you know is the more troublesome
[Guest]: thing because you're not answering yourself there you're not just answering your immediate
[Guest]: material requirements you're answering your father your forefather your teachers and all
[Guest]: your learning and education and the weight of that heritage falls on you at that point
[Guest]: of time so you don't want to feel compromised because it's almost suicide.
[Amit Varma]: So I sometimes think about the value one can bring to the world and you know when I think
[Amit Varma]: about somebody like you obviously there is a lot of value in your writing and you're
[Amit Varma]: doing everything that you're doing but another way in which you could benefit people is by
[Amit Varma]: being to other people what Jeremy Seabrook and Vinod Mehta were to you right so on the
[Amit Varma]: one hand that could be just editing a large publication or leading a large publication
[Amit Varma]: where you're passing these values on to a younger generation who will carry it forward
[Amit Varma]: right so in a sense you're playing the long game where you're saying that okay even if
[Amit Varma]: I can make limited difference I can train these people and take it forward and this
[Amit Varma]: need not be only through a job where you're an editor of a firm and you have people working
[Amit Varma]: under you.
[Amit Varma]: Are there ways to make this kind of mentorship this kind of guidance scale?
[Guest]: I'm glad you asked that question Amit, I'm actually doing it with a couple of people
[Guest]: you know there was one investigative journalist who was to work with me and he was so good
[Guest]: that he used to bring a fresh story every day and it broke my heart when I was leaving
[Guest]: and he said I will also leave and then I told him that see this is technology allows you
[Guest]: to sort of work in different fashions so don't give up on journalism if you want to quit
[Guest]: this organization it's up to you and he came from rural Karnataka so I mean I knew his
[Guest]: strengths he had worked for four or five years with me so I created a product for him which
[Guest]: sort of helps him sort of you know publish on his own without a staff or whatever and
[Guest]: sustain himself by because those stories can't be written by anybody else he sort of you
[Guest]: know I don't know he has a knack of picking these government documents and contrasting
[Amit Varma]: it.
[Amit Varma]: What's his name?
[Guest]: His name is Mahantesh and he was with me in Asianet and he now runs a lovely one-man run
[Guest]: site called the file.in and I'm incredibly proud to say that this boy brought out 50
[Guest]: stories of corruption during Covid and it was discussed during a session of the assembly
[Guest]: in Karnataka and he's a one-man person he has nobody and these days he gets small contribution
[Guest]: from friends and others and he just about enough to pay his rent in Bangalore and survive
[Guest]: and I mean he's not given up and I mean that is the kind of hope that I wish to see everywhere
[Guest]: else and and in this I mean he's far greater than what I have done you know this is the
[Guest]: kind of circumstances that he was in and the kind of background that he came from he is
[Guest]: I mean he's outclassed all of us and this person makes me very very proud and he was
[Guest]: there at my place even yesterday asking shall I run this story or not run this story so
[Guest]: he's so focused he's now got a story on something and he says I won't run this but the lawyer
[Guest]: friend whom you and I get him this pro bono thing you know because there were cases slapped
[Guest]: on him and there was an FIR filed by a big pontiff of a big mutt and then there was a
[Guest]: almost we thought he'd get arrested so we were just working all this to sort of help
[Guest]: him and so he came and he said but your lawyer friend you suggested is saying that this is
[Guest]: not going to work so I should I run it or not run it then I said let us read this story
[Guest]: you know the proof is in the story that you've written so I read it and I said see he is
[Guest]: telling you not to run it because of these two paragraphs so just eliminate those two
[Guest]: paragraphs and bring in another perspective add this perspective and you're free to go
[Guest]: and you're free to run it so I mean there are people like that there are people like
[Guest]: that and he is so now the thing the sad thing is the big mainstream people steal from him
[Guest]: because his thing comes out and and I told him that okay if they are doing that just
[Guest]: the next day you say you're very happy that they have done back journalism they have taken
[Guest]: your story and just say I'm very happy that the mainstream has picked this up and so one
[Guest]: of the newspapers even served him a notice saying that oh you're saying this and it's
[Guest]: ridiculous I said don't even respond let's see what happens don't even respond so journalism
[Guest]: should thrive and somebody is doing good journalism you should encourage and you should sort of
[Guest]: but now the other part of it is that one or two other newspapers have given him this little
[Guest]: small you know monetary package and they have said we will use your stories also with full
[Guest]: credit and because see newspapers don't have creative and investigative journalists like
[Guest]: before and they need good stories and they know that this fellow is putting it out day
[Guest]: in and day out so they accommodate him and give him a small package which is helping
[Guest]: him sustain financially so that gives me a lot of hope and it's it's an it's a very arduous
[Guest]: difficult trek it's a very difficult path but then let's see how long we can hold on
[Guest]: is the kind of spirit with which we need to work I don't think we need to give up so easily
[Guest]: okay you are challenging us we have the wherewithal to sort of address your challenges the spirit
[Guest]: with which we have looked at it so far so I don't know what will happen so in fact he
[Guest]: sometimes when this boy I mean I use him as a metaphor for a lot of good journalists around
[Guest]: in this country doing incredible work bringing great stories to our attention that he won
[Guest]: some sometimes he says sir when I think I have to compromise I'll give up and go and
[Guest]: work somewhere else you know so my firm my friend has a transport company I can be a
[Guest]: clerk there or I'll go back to my native Davangere my father has a home I don't have to pay rent
[Guest]: my kid can go to the government school there so this is the kind of you know I mean level
[Guest]: of commitment that journalists show and he is not from the upper caste again see that
[Guest]: is see these are the stories that I think the rest of India has to listen and I'm happy
[Guest]: that you asked me this question mentoring yes mentoring is a very I think it would be
[Guest]: very arrogant on my part to say that I'm mentoring them what I am trying to do is just to listen
[Guest]: give them the time because they are far bigger mentors than we can ever be because they have
[Guest]: the pinch of that it's the poor that the poverty pinches them each day and they are not willing
[Guest]: to give up as yet so that is bravery of a different order and I and we are I mean we
[Guest]: are asked to play a small role in giving them that confidence to sustain that and sometimes
[Guest]: it feels very cruel to say that go on that path keep continuing on that path because
[Guest]: it's your idealism and you want somebody else to bear the cross so that also makes me feel
[Guest]: very guilty at times because you are reflective of these things and you see that things are
[Guest]: not shaping up well for him and journalism is dead the way it was.
[Amit Varma]: And also you know I just think people like this are outliers in terms of courage and
[Amit Varma]: commitment and you should not need to be an outlier you know good journalism should be
[Amit Varma]: something that should be possible as a matter of course and what I meant about the mentorship
[Amit Varma]: scaling is that okay it's a couple of people but and I'm just thinking aloud here and maybe
[Amit Varma]: listeners will also have ideas that are there ways to kind of get this across to more people
[Amit Varma]: spread the value around you know that's what I sometimes want.
[Guest]: There was this platform that was created in Bangalore again to fund alternate media and
[Guest]: all that and but that has become a forum for both sides both side is some kind of a thing
[Guest]: so again they I mean I don't know if they came under pressure what happened but then
[Guest]: you know you are you're funding right left and center so there is a certain value system
[Guest]: that you should have embraced certain professionalism that should have been embraced and promoted
[Guest]: but see again see the problem is that everybody comes under pressure and everybody comes under
[Guest]: pressure they also have to sort of retain their identity and they retain it in some
[Guest]: botched up manner and it's a very sad story it's a sad commentary of our times but I mean
[Guest]: it's not fair to blame anybody because you know they come under such enormous I mean
[Guest]: I know what it is you know I have faced it myself so we come under pressure and I don't
[Guest]: think we should make victims of ourselves and play it up and say oh I face this I face
[Guest]: these many cases I they went after me for this so people have their own way of coping
[Guest]: with it and there are some incredible stories out there like the story that I just narrated
[Guest]: to you of Mahantesh and Dipoye.
[Amit Varma]: So couple of final questions as we grow older and I think you're on also in your late 40s
[Amit Varma]: like I am so as we grow older I've realized that our conception of time changes it can
[Amit Varma]: happen when people who were part of our lives no longer are as you know we you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: Vinod and it can happen just because you know when you're young you have a very compressed
[Amit Varma]: view of time when you're 20 you think 30 is old age you know you think 50 is completely
[Amit Varma]: out there you romantically say oh I will never get that far but then the decades pass in
[Amit Varma]: a hurry like I love this phrase his friend of mine Gautam John used while he was having
[Amit Varma]: breakfast with me recently where he said the days are long the years are short and I feel
[Amit Varma]: that the older I get that's kind of more and more true and this has a number of different
[Amit Varma]: effects one is that things which are way back in the past like 30-40 years ago when we were
[Amit Varma]: younger it would have seemed far away in the past today it's like a blink of an eye we
[Amit Varma]: ourselves have seen decades pass in the blink of an eye so does that kind of change does
[Amit Varma]: that kind of change your gaze in certain ways where if there's a lot of shit going down
[Amit Varma]: right now you can be equanimous about it take a step back see the wider sweep of history
[Amit Varma]: see where the arc is going and the other aspect also is like I was very intrigued by you know
[Amit Varma]: keeping your Devika out of the book there is he gets married at 21 right and the thing
[Amit Varma]: is that that's very common for someone you know people will get married even younger
[Amit Varma]: and you go further back in time and you realize that life expectancies maybe decades ago was
[Amit Varma]: like 40-45 you know you and I would be outliers and you know and I think about how their approach
[Amit Varma]: to life then changes that then it makes sense that you're getting married earlier and you're
[Amit Varma]: having more kids because you don't know how many will survive and so on and so forth and
[Amit Varma]: now we've reached a stage where life expectancies are great especially for privileged elites
[Amit Varma]: like us and and you know who knows me perhaps not in our lifetimes but at some point you're
[Amit Varma]: going to like extend it to lengths which actually seem dystopian if you think about it. Everybody
[Amit Varma]: would be Vishnu Pitamaha. What a horrible thought. Anyway so you know how does that
[Amit Varma]: how has that changed your outlook on life in general like you know one of the ways in
[Amit Varma]: which I think I have changed with time is that earlier I was kind of goal oriented that
[Amit Varma]: I had specific goals yeh karna hai, woh karna hai, yeh karna hai but now I've become more
[Amit Varma]: not even process oriented but more journey oriented that take happiness in the small
[Amit Varma]: things you know wake up in the morning looking forward to what you're going to do that day
[Amit Varma]: and so on so how has that changed your approach to life like when you wake up in the morning
[Amit Varma]: what do you look forward to, how do you define happiness for yourself today? Oh that's a
[Guest]: that's a very very tough question. It's it's it's I mean I have slowed down a little I
[Guest]: think that is a great thing that I have done you know I mean I used to you know be in office
[Guest]: from 10 in the morning till 10 in the night I would not see my daughter not see my son
[Guest]: and you know these pressures and I would take calls even at one o'clock in the night because
[Guest]: the final edition would go and I would I was very in I was a very meticulous edit I wanted
[Guest]: to see the front page before it went to the press and they would wake me up and and calls
[Guest]: could come at any time of the day and all that so the best thing that has happened after
[Guest]: I have stopped running institutions in the last two or two and a half years or three
[Guest]: years is and and it took took the whole time writing and I don't know if I will ever get
[Guest]: back to the newsroom it may happen may not happen but the thing is that I have slowed
[Guest]: down that it's I'm enjoying that that that slowness because you know I mean you don't
[Guest]: have to sort of accomplish something or prove yourself to somebody else all that you're
[Guest]: left to prove is to yourself and so that is sort of you know I mean I mean I I became
[Guest]: hypertensive at one point of time and now all my indices are good is it's touch gold
[Guest]: or touch whatever it's sort of looking normal and and I have to just manage a little and
[Guest]: then it I don't have to really be worried about it so so that is one thing that has
[Guest]: happened so I I usually get a very early I'm not a I mean for a journalist I'm an early
[Guest]: riser I'm up by five so I'm looking forward to the walk with my wife in the morning so
[Guest]: that is when I get to listen to you, your podcast you know I mean I I have a I create
[Guest]: a playlist and then I do a certain ritualistic listening and then I walk for an hour and
[Guest]: so I mean there is a spillover for the next day that the day after so I I look forward
[Guest]: to that and then of course you know days that are I'm bored I just listen to music today
[Guest]: for instance I listen to Jaitirtha Mevundi who's a rising star in Hindustani music and
[Guest]: you see superbly rendered Chandrakants you know I mean so I mean I was listening to that
[Guest]: so I mean the pace has come down and that pace coming down also sometimes brings anxiety
[Guest]: to me let me confess because I feel that I have retired although because I'm still writing
[Guest]: columns you know I mean I breathlessly writing I produce a lot of writing you know I mean
[Guest]: I write four columns a month which is a lot and you have to come up with new ideas and
[Guest]: then in between there are special requests so you have to do that and I'm working on
[Guest]: two books simultaneously and I'm commissioned by Penguin to do those two books so so those
[Guest]: things are lying on my mind so library work travel all that is there out there but then
[Guest]: sometimes I feel that that buzz that was there in the newsroom is missing and oh I have I
[Guest]: semi-retired oh is this how you sort of you know I mean live if you're not working full
[Guest]: time so then I take solace from from people on Brunton Street in Bangalore that is where
[Guest]: Ramachandra Gohar lives he has lived that life for a long time of just writing so I
[Guest]: just calm myself you know I mean that occasionally comes up and because my father worked for
[Guest]: his all all his life he went to teach first at the Christ College and then Canada University
[Guest]: you know that he was just working and he retired for me my retirement or semi-retirement or
[Guest]: a break has come I mean in my you know I'm just about touching 50 and so it's come very
[Guest]: early so I mean you don't know what to do so you have to you innovate so I as I work
[Guest]: with some startup trying to help them build a media thing and it's it's all it's all mentorship
[Guest]: you know basically they come and then I discuss ideas with them so that gives me a lot of
[Guest]: joy so there's somebody who's trying to develop a mental health product and they've said how
[Guest]: does how does one link media to that and then I was just trying to get consumed with that
[Guest]: idea so Bangalore that way I mean one thing I've learned is the small little idea that
[Guest]: my father told me that as you grow older engage with the younger so they keep you young they
[Guest]: bring new ideas and don't think that you have to pontificate listen to them because they
[Guest]: would have brighter ideas they would have come with a different set of questions so
[Guest]: to answer which you will have to equip yourself so don't be this person that you know you
[Guest]: don't go with a set of ideas with them so that listening sort of helps so I come to
[Guest]: Koshi's I go to other places and just listen to people speak and they come home and then
[Guest]: there's because of my engagement in the newsroom my the the colleagues who work with me are
[Guest]: all over so they call up they say sir if you were there you would allow this story this
[Guest]: editor is not so I don't get into that kind of a thing but then I just listen to them
[Guest]: so that gives them a bit of solace and whatever so I think writing I have what I have discovered
[Guest]: is that after 2008-19 when I in 19 beginning of 19 is when I started working on the Deve
[Guest]: Gowda book I feel I mean I have told myself that I'm essentially a writer and my wife
[Guest]: has reiterated that she's also a writer so she is she's a poet so she has reiterated
[Guest]: that thing that I married you essentially because you were a writer not because you
[Guest]: were a big editor or that or this or whatever so that reassures me that there is no pressure
[Guest]: from the home front where she's expecting a certain kind of you know thing from me and
[Guest]: I am falling short of it so it's very very important that you have understanding partners
[Guest]: so so that is there and then my daughter is full of stories and my son is you know I mean
[Guest]: full of stories they are reading different kinds of things which I mentioned in the acknowledgement
[Guest]: of my book you know I mean they're reading various different things and except reading
[Guest]: their father they're doing everything else so which is a very good thing maybe they're
[Amit Varma]: reading the father's secretly you don't you don't confess to these I read my father very
[Guest]: secretly I never told him when he was alive that I liked something that he wrote which
[Guest]: is a very strange thing I've written about it in my book pickles from home but it was
[Guest]: I mean he was gone by then and then I mean in the final stages of his life we had developed
[Guest]: a protocol where if he had written a new poem he would leave it on my table that is my bedroom
[Guest]: table and I would look at it from a distance stare at it and then probably read a couple
[Guest]: of lines and leave it there and after one week it would have gone back to his room or
[Guest]: he would have taken it away so I speak about it I recall Oran Pamuk's Nobel I mean Nobel
[Guest]: speech Nobel Prize speech where he speaks in a similar fashion about his father not
[Guest]: that I was I'm not comparing myself with Pamuk or whatever and it's just a lovely piece of
[Guest]: literature which I'm picking and using it as an anecdote to tell you what exact emotion
[Guest]: that went past in my mind so his father gives him a suitcase and it's and that suitcase
[Guest]: contained the writings of his father and he never opened it to read and his father always
[Guest]: wanted this approval from the son who's already become a big writer right so so in my case
[Guest]: that was not the thing my father was already an accomplished writer had won the all the
[Guest]: awards that he had to win and he was celebrated all that but somehow there was that I could
[Guest]: not build a relationship with his writing because he wrote a lot of one-act plays he
[Guest]: wrote full-length plays and he was writing a fantastic full-length play on Columbus and
[Guest]: globalization and I mean using Columbus as the prop to speak about globalization and
[Guest]: he wanted to look at the history of this Vachana movement through the wives of Basavanna Gangambike
[Guest]: and Nilambike it's a beautiful way of recently I was reading this Dheerendra Jha's book on
[Guest]: assassin Gandhi's assassin and there I thought that why is it that nobody has explored that
[Guest]: Manorama as a wonderful literary character now the girlfriend of that fellow the other
[Guest]: fellow who gets hanged Godse's accomplice he has a girlfriend called Manorama she's
[Guest]: a Christian girl and she also testifies later and nobody has exploited that character as
[Guest]: a literary character so I mean I mean Gangambika and Nilambika that my father was working on
[Guest]: I thought I mean adds great potential so but I never got to discuss all of this when he
[Guest]: was around so he was his literary he was already an a kind of a star and we always responded
[Guest]: to his public image of course he was a very kind father but later I think we can we became
[Guest]: very conscious of his public stature I mean the road on which I live is named after him
[Guest]: so it's ironically it's also the road where the BJP has its headquarters so you know in
[Guest]: a lot of these things happen you know I mean I don't regret but I ask myself why is it
[Guest]: that I never could come to speak of course he wrote a great poem called Chasana Alabandhu
[Guest]: his collection is also called Chasana Alabandhu it was on the the coal collapse that happened
[Guest]: in Bihar it was very empathetic and very I mean I really loved that poem and now when
[Guest]: I look at it I feel he was such a sensitive writer and he should have written more but
[Guest]: he spent all his time mentoring people and that is also there that sees I mean we always
[Guest]: feel that he sort of spent a lot of time nurturing younger writers he published some 200 300
[Guest]: volumes you know of young writers were all very big today and they all celebrate him
[Guest]: and they all make him look bigger than me or obviously he is and I mean I am never sort
[Guest]: of you know I mean put on par with him or made to look I mean as good or whatever but
[Guest]: that's okay I can live with that in Canada because he is the star here you know I mean
[Guest]: that is there but then but then I always feel that he was a better writer you know I mean
[Guest]: probably should have written more and so I am trying to fulfill that thing I feel sometimes
[Amit Varma]: in a personal sense not in a sense of achievements or writing do you sometimes look in the mirror
[Guest]: and see him no I know I mean not in the mirror I suppose not in the mirror I am a completely
[Guest]: different person I feel I carry a bit of my mother's grit my father was very humongously
[Guest]: sensitive person and I am not as I feel I am not as sensitive as him or as empathetic
[Guest]: as him or there's a lot to catch up I feel and he's a he's still a tower you know in
[Guest]: towering figure for me and I think parents are always like that it's not just me when
[Guest]: I probably am exaggerating so he is he's always that he was a fine moral you know that the
[Guest]: moral core that he had you know I mean it's a it's a very remarkable achievement it's
[Guest]: not his children or his writing or his status as a cultural literary patron of writing in
[Guest]: Canada or whatever but I think his moral core was solid and he could empathize he could
[Guest]: sort of allow people to come into his lives I am I am not that I don't think I am so much
[Guest]: like him but I have huge admiration for him probably because I am not like him so that
[Guest]: is that is there because.
[Amit Varma]: So a couple of kind of final questions and I was struck by what you said your wife told
[Amit Varma]: you that she married you because you were a writer not because you were an editor and
[Amit Varma]: there's something in you know the way I'd interpret that is a writer is someone who
[Amit Varma]: has a life of the imagination they have an interior life and earlier you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: how your maternal grandmother loved to read and your mother loved to read and I was just
[Amit Varma]: having this chat with a friend I met yesterday for breakfast where he was lamenting that
[Amit Varma]: in the office where he works he can't have a conversation with anyone because everything
[Amit Varma]: is restricted to what they do and the lane they're on and otherwise everything is beyond
[Amit Varma]: that is like just banal and boring and they're not reading much they're not engaged in art
[Amit Varma]: and all of that and clearly in your case you know within your family there is that engagement
[Amit Varma]: and I can see why you know that's attractive that you have that interior life where you're
[Amit Varma]: always so when you look around you and obviously your circles would be self-selected you would
[Amit Varma]: hang out with people like you so they would all be reading books and all of that so do
[Amit Varma]: you think in general that this is something that people miss out on do people like have
[Amit Varma]: you ever kind of noticed this do you you know that does it strike you that in every generation
[Amit Varma]: there must be the same standard fixed percentage of people who don't really engage with art
[Amit Varma]: or books or whatever and it's the same all across time or do you think it's a greater
[Amit Varma]: or smaller worry now you know do you look at people and say oh okay there's no sort
[Amit Varma]: of you know other in rich interior life going on?
[Guest]: No I think people have you know I mean there is a larger people coming into the pool I
[Guest]: mean I don't feel cynical about that at all because I think from our times to now technology
[Guest]: has facilitated a lot of things you know there's whether willy-nilly you know something comes
[Guest]: your way and see even a Netflix or a movie that you watch or whatever you know pushes
[Guest]: you into a different kind of stream and you know you're not robots not to sort of recognize
[Guest]: that so you start living a different kind of a thing and I think technology also facilitates
[Guest]: a lot of other lives that you can lead so I'm not very sure whether it's all for the
[Guest]: good of bad or whatever but then people I always have felt lead several lives and you
[Guest]: know I mean I mean I don't know if it was Graham Greene or somebody else who said that
[Guest]: you know I mean I mean I think Marquess who spoke about there are always there's always
[Guest]: a secret life that a person leads so I mean I think people lead different kinds of lives
[Guest]: but whether it whether it has a literary or a cultural kind of accent on it is a question
[Guest]: to be asked because what we are surrounded today is not just books, books have started
[Guest]: coming in different forms it could be OTT shows platforms and you know movies and podcasts
[Guest]: and radio and a lot of different things have suddenly started coming up you know I mean
[Guest]: I didn't even know that my son listened to so many interesting podcasts I took a lot
[Guest]: of recommendations from him you know I mean he was saying you're listening to the same
[Guest]: boring stuff why don't you listen to this thank you son for so you know I mean I mean
[Guest]: then I realized that he listens to that because he wants to keep a certain kind of mental
[Guest]: balance when he is interacting with us so there are new things that they pick up and
[Guest]: there are new things out there which people consume in ways that we don't understand as
[Guest]: yet or I am probably very limiting and I mean I don't understand that as yet so but there
[Guest]: are I mean there are lots of interesting things happening below this surface and suddenly
[Guest]: you may have a writer here and a writer there and a filmmaker there and a documentary filmmaker
[Guest]: there who may just want to give up his mainstream profession and pursue that and we see that
[Guest]: a lot you know I mean in Bangalore and Karnataka especially where the software things sort
[Guest]: of jades you so quickly I at least know half a dozen people who have given up their software
[Guest]: jobs and I mean and I've taken up either filmmaking or writing or in one case who's now a very
[Guest]: controversial subject has even become a historian so people find different avenues to sort of
[Guest]: so I don't I'm not very cynical about that I think from our earlier generation to now
[Guest]: our generation to later I think the whole thing is sort of opening up but what it how
[Guest]: it sort of you know shapes you or whether it's the same kind of inner life you know
[Guest]: I mean your understanding of inner life was also very limited it was inner life always
[Guest]: meant a very spiritual thing but now that spiritual thing has a lot of other wings attached
[Guest]: to it so it could it could mean you could acquire your spiritual thing through some
[Guest]: godman or and that godman puts you on to something else and something else and something else
[Guest]: and so it creates its own kind of world and cosmos and whatever so it's a very complicated
[Guest]: question that you asked and you threw me out of gear.
[Amit Varma]: I like what you said about you know people have several lives so before I go to my last
[Amit Varma]: question I'll read out a poem I love which kind of is on that theme and it's called Harmony
[Amit Varma]: in the Boudoir by Mark Strand.
[Amit Varma]: After years of marriage he stands at the foot of the bed and tells his wife that she will
[Amit Varma]: never know him that for everything he says there is more that he does not say that behind
[Amit Varma]: each word he utters there is another word and hundreds more behind that one all those
[Amit Varma]: unsaid words he says contain his true self which has been betrayed by the superficial
[Amit Varma]: self before him.
[Amit Varma]: So you see he says kicking off his slippers I am more than what I have led you to believe
[Amit Varma]: I am oh you silly man says his wife of course you are I find that just thinking of you having
[Amit Varma]: so many selves receding into nothingness is very exciting that you barely exist as you
[Amit Varma]: are couldn't please me more.
[Amit Varma]: So my final question is that I'd love you to share with me and my listeners books music
[Amit Varma]: films anything at all that you absolutely love so you know it could be something you
[Amit Varma]: read recently it could be an old favorite you always held close to your heart it could
[Guest]: be any of these three or all of these three that would mean I get a little confused because
[Guest]: a lot of things that I like from a very early time for very personal reasons I have always
[Guest]: loved to reread Of Human Bondage by Somsit Maum I like the character there and I've identified
[Guest]: myself with that character many times in crisis and so that is from a very from a real past
[Guest]: and then there's another book for very strange reasons you know I mean taught me how to think
[Guest]: and taught me how to look at explore an idea differently which was called Man's Worldly
[Guest]: Goods by Leo Huberman and Paul Sweezy it was a economic history of the world I mean of
[Guest]: course they were Marxist but of course the fact that they were Marxist was not important
[Guest]: it was the narrative that they built which later on a lot of non-fiction that was published
[Guest]: in the West you know explored and you have now a lot of good range of non-fiction writing
[Guest]: which you read on specialist subjects so this was one of the very early books which sort
[Guest]: of you know caught on and I read a lot of a good economic books after that I mean so
[Guest]: that is that is something there and then of course my all-time autobiography favorite
[Guest]: is Bertrand Russell the three volumes in Bantam Press paperback that I still preserve at home
[Guest]: I read that and that I read that very early in my teens and I was very absolutely shocked
[Guest]: when he spoke about his sexual life and things like that so so and then of course the chapter
[Guest]: on mathematics and all that was intriguing and how could somebody be so many things was
[Guest]: some first time that came before me was at that time and of course my Kannada writers
[Guest]: of course K.S. Narasimhaswamy was very personal to me when I was very romantic and young and
[Guest]: thought that every other girl that I meet may fall in love with me so he was he created
[Guest]: that kind of connubial bliss and a world that he constructed was so fantastic and his metaphors
[Guest]: and his images were even to this day you know I mean sort of they don't escape you so he
[Guest]: was there and then Kopal Krishna Adiga tried to rationalize a lot of things for me so he
[Guest]: tried to bring in history into his poetry he tried to bring in ideas into his poems
[Guest]: and he sort of ridiculed the idea of writing on love and family the way the other man was
[Guest]: writing so that was there and so there is Narasimhaswamy, there is Adiga and then of
[Guest]: course there is Kuvempu, Kuvempu's prose you know I mean I don't like his poetry to be
[Guest]: honest he's very sort of you know I mean I mean I feel he's very artificial of course
[Guest]: there are some great poems too but then I love him for his prose and I love him for
[Guest]: his novels so he was great and he was he was he again you know I mean what fascinates me
[Guest]: was he or Lankesh never left the corner of their room but they imagined their world sitting
[Guest]: in that corner, Karanth was not like that, Karanth always borrowed money to travel the
[Guest]: world and wrote but these two guys I don't know how it was possible you know I mean it's
[Guest]: unthinkable that Lankesh could bring the world to my feet and make it so interesting, Kuvempu
[Guest]: if you look at the range of his poems that I was looking he's writing about some little
[Guest]: development happening in Mexico at that time in the 50s 60s and then that spirituality
[Guest]: which was passed on as some kind of a moral you know thing beautiful core that it built
[Guest]: in me is his poetry I may not like but there is one poem that he writes about the conscience
[Guest]: and that has been some kind of a mantra for me when I thought I was not theist or agnostic
[Guest]: or whatever and I am atheist I try to borrow that as my manifesto so there is his writings
[Guest]: and of course when it comes to English Graham Greene is one of my but before Graham Greene
[Guest]: I was a great fan of Joseph Conrad nobody speaks of today and secret agent is you know
[Guest]: I mean very thrilling kind of thing about anarchy was always something that I have gone
[Guest]: back to when I have wanted to understand a lot of complex political problems so secret
[Guest]: agent Nostromo heart of darkness so I mean he was later on condemned as someone who looked
[Guest]: at things in a very racial frame but then ideology can make everything look like a nonsense
[Guest]: so I don't think we should really worry about that but he has given me great joy and he
[Guest]: was also very important for me because he learnt his English after he was he crossed
[Guest]: his 30s you know he was a Polish guy who learnt English much later in life and wrote such
[Guest]: splendid fresh prose so somebody told me this you know long back they said if you have learnt
[Guest]: English after having read your mother tongue well you write your English very differently
[Guest]: so I always carried that with me and Joseph Conrad was a symbol of that for me so of course
[Guest]: Marquez and Borges the Latin American writers these two stand out and then I mean for me
[Guest]: oh yeah the great writer was Balzac for me cousin Pons and yeah Flaubert Madame Bovary
[Guest]: you know when I read it at an age when I wouldn't have understood it but you know I mean I read
[Guest]: it because there was adultery happening you know I mean you know you wanted to explore
[Guest]: that whole thing and then Madame Bovary was a great thing that and then I still remember
[Guest]: the I think was it a Paris Review interview or some other interview where he's asked on
[Guest]: his deathbed Flaubert is asked who is Madame Bovary so he says Madame Bovary say wow it's
[Guest]: me so it's I mean things like that which sort of you know I mean made you a lot of European
[Guest]: literature Victor Hugo again you know I mean somebody who taught me to sort of look at
[Guest]: poverty in a completely different thing I mean Dickens of course how can I forget Dickens
[Guest]: you know I mean Dickens was somebody who is an ideal for me for a very long time and it
[Guest]: gave me great comfort when I became a journalist that he was also sort of you know doing a
[Guest]: lot of these things and Orwell, Orwell the first thing I read of Orwell was not a novel
[Guest]: or animal form or anything it was the review that Orwell wrote for my experiments with
[Guest]: truth what an incredible review that was. The Gandhi essay is fantastic, the first paragraph
[Guest]: of it. So that was there and Orwell and so these are I mean lots of things that you read
[Guest]: and off late you know I mean I really enjoyed reading I mean this is a few months ago was
[Guest]: Michael Sandel's Tyranny of Merit I thought there was a lot of argument that one could
[Guest]: borrow to write about India itself it was a great book then I read I mean the book that
[Guest]: I really loved and I wrote about also was Amartya Sen's book Amartya Sen's memoirs
[Guest]: or autobiography Home and the World because that is the kind of the local and the universal
[Guest]: that I always had imagined and it was just like reading about my own childhood. Rooted
[Guest]: cosmopolitan and you know the astonishing thing between I mean that I read there and
[Guest]: also read in Marquis's autobiography Living to Tell a Tale is where Amartya Sen says that
[Guest]: my English was not so good I'm not was not very confident about my English and he's in
[Guest]: 10th class or something and Marquis says the biggest regret is won the Nobel Prize mind
[Guest]: you both of them have won the Nobel Prize and Marquis in his Living to Tell a Tale says
[Guest]: the regret that I still have to this day is that I never spoke English well or I can't
[Guest]: speak English well. So I mean what is it that made me wonder what is it that this language
[Guest]: what is this language which extracts regrets from even the most accomplished so this language
[Guest]: is there is something else in this language it's very pernicious. So I started looking
[Guest]: at English a little more suspiciously because you know if it has that kind of a hold and
[Guest]: sway on even the most accomplished then that's that I thought it was not correct. So of course
[Guest]: Amartya Sen and I read I greatly enjoyed reading Direndra Jha's book on Gandhi's assassin and
[Guest]: not so much for to understand the ideological construct but for the side stories in it the
[Amit Varma]: lovers that these people had. His previous books are really good if you've read Ascetic
[Guest]: Games and the one he co-wrote with Direndra Jha. He was an extraordinarily talented writer
[Guest]: and I really enjoyed that and of course for my book I mean I had to read a lot of biographies
[Guest]: and autobiographies and all that but that was part of to sort of see and measure how
[Guest]: I mean for my own book or quote or look at cross-reference whatever but I haven't liked
[Guest]: a lot of political biographies that have been written now not that I have written a great
[Guest]: one but I'm not really because you know I feel that there is a complete they don't get
[Guest]: into the emotional side of the person the politician. The politician is always looked
[Guest]: at through the framework of power and achievement and government and state and things like that
[Guest]: but they forget that they are often people who are as vulnerable as you and I are and
[Guest]: power does not eliminate anything. I mean I see the insecurity of Deva Gowda even at
[Guest]: 89 today when he speaks about something or the other so I mean I can feel that you know
[Guest]: I mean why is he I mean I feel why is he panicking about this it's such a small thing but then
[Guest]: I realized that he's a human being you know I mean he has to react like you and me so
[Guest]: those things you know I mean but then there I again that was a great book which is I really
[Guest]: enjoyed on the political side was the team of rivals of course it was not read recently
[Guest]: but Doris Kearns Goodwin she was remarkable fantastic absolutely marvelous I have been
[Guest]: trying to read Louis Buuel in his memoirs again and Louis Althusser I don't know for
[Guest]: some strange reason I started picking up on reading it and so I keep going back to a lot
[Guest]: of these things I actually went back to a book of interviews by Oriana Fallaci interviewing
[Guest]: history it's fascinating because this lady I mean of course there she was accused of
[Guest]: making up a few quotes here and there but who cares it's actually written so well same
[Guest]: thing about Kapuskinski you know I mean Rizat Kapuskinski shadows in the sun yeah in imperial
[Guest]: shadows in the sun Shah of Shahs and amazing thing I recently I think Salman Rushdie wrote
[Guest]: a small little note on his Kapuskinski and his relationship and the thing that he does
[Guest]: on that new platform whatever it is called and I subscribe and I just get his posts and
[Guest]: he had written about Kapuskinski and an immensely talented writer now forget the fudging bit
[Guest]: if he if at all he's that is a separate that's a separate issue but the prose itself and
[Guest]: the thing itself was so appealing so this is about writing you know but then lots more
[Guest]: actually but then Kannada of course lots more but when it comes to music you know I mean
[Guest]: I've become a slightly eclectic listener now because if my children again you know they
[Guest]: listen to a lot of other things and they make me listen and but I am wedded to committed
[Guest]: deeply committed to listening to Mansoor Manlik Arjun Mansoor whom I had the great opportunity
[Guest]: to accompany him to the local bank in Dharwad holding his hand when he when my father went
[Guest]: to see him so I mean Mansoor because he's very soothing and I've Bheem Sen Joshi and
[Guest]: Kumar Gandharvan all the Dharwad singers I like but he is very special because he does
[Guest]: not I don't know if it's the right word to use he does not pretend in his singing he's
[Guest]: he does not sort of perform he gives himself in he gives himself in so I mean I'm really
[Guest]: taken in but and and and something that the rest of outside of Karnataka people may not
[Guest]: be familiar is his singing of the Vachanas and again you know I mean it's it's marvelous
[Guest]: and I listen to them very often again Basuraj Rajguru singing the Vachanas Basuraj Sidhram
[Guest]: Jambaldini another Hindustani great singing the Vachanas for me Vachanas singing has the
[Guest]: potential of the Rabindra Sangeet you know which is an independent genre which has not
[Guest]: been converted all these Lingayat leaders and politicians all of them seek power through
[Guest]: the caste but then they have not harnessed their cultural treasures it's a complaint
[Guest]: that I have against them so I love to listen to that and I I love to listen to songs of
[Guest]: Bendre being sung by good people I recently for his birthday I compiled a Twitter playlist
[Guest]: and it was a I mean I enjoyed doing something like that so that's that's about it I mean
[Guest]: I'm on to Netflix because I my wife and I joke that this is the platform which has helped
[Guest]: us keep our marriage going that's our time you know when we watch shows and we just finished
[Guest]: watching Outlander so I mean I think the sixth season is going to come and we are waiting
[Guest]: curiously for that she's watching Nightfall and I have missed the initial episodes and
[Guest]: she said you should watch so because we try to catch up with history and all that you
[Guest]: know which we which we could not have read deeply we try to sort of understand the nuance
[Guest]: of it through them lots of one interesting times you know interesting stuff that comes
[Guest]: by us and then we consume and it becomes something else in your head and she did not like watching
[Guest]: money haste or whatever so I watched the whole thing so things like that lovely you've given
[Amit Varma]: me so much to discover and dig into so I must thank you for your patience especially since
[Amit Varma]: we were supposed to discuss your book five hours have passed we haven't even mentioned
[Amit Varma]: it or we've kind of mentioned it but next time I come to Bangalore I'll certainly do
[Guest]: a thing with you for the book I'm very keen to know what you thought of it and what you
[Amit Varma]: know I can tell you I can tell I can tell you what I thought of it right now I loved
[Amit Varma]: it you know I was first intimidated by the length like just looking at Kindle locations
[Amit Varma]: that are just you know I went to the epilogue and that was after 7,000 locations or something
[Amit Varma]: and then I said okay this is going to be a long read but it was actually a really easy
[Amit Varma]: read and what I enjoyed about it is that point that you made that too many biographies will
[Amit Varma]: not get into the personal you don't get a sense of the flesh and blood person but in
[Amit Varma]: your case you really brought not just Deva Gauda alive but many of the other characters
[Amit Varma]: around him like Urs and Ramkrishna Hegde and all of that and they're all kind of so I in
[Amit Varma]: the end I felt that the book was too short I would have liked to go deeper and so it's
[Guest]: a lovely book already 600 pages and my publisher wouldn't agree yeah but these publishers because
[Amit Varma]: now these constraints should not be there honestly but we will we will talk about it
[Guest]: at length when we next come thank you so much it's been a pleasure being on your show and
[Amit Varma]: I'm a fan of your show thank you if you enjoyed listening to this episode check out the show
[Amit Varma]: notes dive into those rabbit holes do pick up Sugata's superb book furrows in a field
[Amit Varma]: I guess we'll discuss that in some future episode now you can follow Sugata at Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Sugata Raju you can follow me at Amit Verma AMI TV ARMA you can browse past episodes of
[Amit Varma]: the scene in the unseen at seen unseen dot I n thank you for listening did you enjoy this episode of the
[Amit Varma]: scene in the unseen if so would you like to support the production of the show you can go
[Amit Varma]: over to seen unseen dot I n slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this
[Amit Varma]: podcast alive and kicking thank you